<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hymn to Peace⁠—Eulogy on the heroes slain in the war, in which the Author finds occasion to mention his Brother⁠—Address to the patriots who have survived the conflict; exhorting them to preserve the liberty they have established⁠—The danger of losing it by inattention illustrated in the rape of the Golden Fleece⁠—Freedom succeeding to Despotism in the moral world, like Order succeeding to Chaos in the physical world⁠—Atlas, the guardian Genius of Africa, denounces to Hesper the crimes of his people in the slavery of the Africans⁠—The Author addresses his countrymen on that subject, and on the principles of their government.</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hesper, recurring to his object of showing Columbus the importance of his discoveries, reverses the order of time, and exhibits the continent again in its savage state⁠—He then displays the progress of arts in America⁠—Fur-trade⁠—Fisheries⁠—Productions⁠—Commerce⁠—Education⁠—Philosophical discoveries⁠—Painting⁠—Poetry.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Hail, holy Peace, from thy sublime abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid circling saints that grace the throne of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his arm around our embryon earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretcht the dim void and gave to nature birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere morning stars his glowing chambers hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or songs of gladness woke an angel’s tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veil’d in the splendors of his beamful mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In blest repose thy placid form reclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived in his life, his inward sapience caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traced and toned his universe of thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne through the expanse with his creating voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy presence bade the unfolding worlds rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led forth the systems on their bright career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaped all their curves and fashion’d every sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spaced out their suns, and round each radiant goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orb over orb, compell’d their train to roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade heaven’s own harmony their force combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught all their host symphonious strains to join,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to seraphic harps their sounding lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their joys to angels and to men their praise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From scenes of blood, these verdant shores that stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From numerous friends in recent battle slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From blazing towns that scorch the purple sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From houseless hordes, their smoking walls that fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the black prison ships, those groaning graves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From warring fleets that vex the gory waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a storm’d world, long taught thy flight to mourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rise, delightful Peace, and greet thy glad return.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For now the untuneful trump shall grate no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye silver streams, no longer swell with gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear from your war-beat banks the guilty stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With yon retiring navies to the main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While other views unfolding on my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And happier themes bid bolder numbers rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring, bounteous Peace, in thy celestial throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life to my soul and rapture to my song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me to trace, with pure unclouded ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arts and virtues that attend thy sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thy blissful charms, that here descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through distant realms and endless years extend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too long the groans of death and battle’s bray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have rung discordant through my turgid lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The drum’s rude clang, the war wolfs hideous howl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convulsed my nerves and agonized my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untuned the harp for all but misery’s pains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chased the Muse from corse-encumber’d plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let memory’s balm its pious fragrance shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On heroes’ wounds and patriot warriors dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept, departed Shades, these grateful sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fond attendants through your homeward skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, my earliest friend, my Brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fall untimely still renews my tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In youthful sports, in toils, in taste allied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My kind companion and my faithful guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When death’s dread summons, from our infant eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had call’d our last loved parent to the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though young in arms and still obscure thy name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bosom panted for the deeds of fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath Montgomery’s eye, when by thy steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In northern wilds the frequent savage fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired by his voice and foremost at his call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount the breach or scale the flamy wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy daring hand had many a laurel gain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If years had ripen’d what thy fancy feign’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamented Youth! when thy great leader bled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the same wound thy parting spirit fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join’d the long train, the self-devoted band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods, the saviors of their native land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On fame’s high pinnacle their names shall shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unending ages greet the group divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose holy hands our banners first unfurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conquer’d freedom for the grateful world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And you, their peers, whose steel avenged their blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose breasts with theirs our sacred rampart stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious relics of a thousand fields!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you at last the foe reluctant yields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though the Muse, too prodigal of praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dares with the dead your living worth to raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not, my friends, the patriot’s task is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Freedom safe, because the battle’s won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unnumber’d foes, far different arms that wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait the weak moment when she quits her shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plunge in her bold breast the insidious dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pour keen poison round her thoughtless heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps they’ll strive her votaries to divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their own veins to draw the vital tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps, by cooler calculation shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Create materials to construct a throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzle her guardians with the glare of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corrupt with power, with borrowed pomp inflate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid through the land the soft infection creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whelm all her sons in one lethargic sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crush her vast empire in its brilliant birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chase the goddess from the ravaged earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The dragon thus, that watcht the Colchian fleece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foil’d the fierce warriors of wide-plundering Greece;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warriors of matchless might and wondrous birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s sceptred sons and demigods of earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on the sacred tree, the glittering prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs o’er its guard and tires the warriors’ eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First their hurl’d spears his spiral folds assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spears fall pointless from his flaky mail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward with dauntless swords they plunge amain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shuns their blows, recoils his twisting train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darts forth his forky tongue, heaves high in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fiery crest and sheds a hideous glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Champs, churns his poisonous juice, and hissing loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spouts thick the stifling tempest o’er the crowd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, with one sweep of convoluted train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls back all Greece and besoms wide the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erturns the sons of gods, dispersing far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pirate horde, and closes quick the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his red jaws tremendous triumph roars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark Euxine trembles to its distant shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud Jason starts confounded in his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads back his peers and dares no more the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the sly Priestess brings her opiate spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft charms that hush the triple hound of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids Orpheus tune his all-enchanting lyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And join to calm the guardian’s sleepless ire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon from the tepid ground blue vapors rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sounds melodious move along the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A settling tremor through his folds extends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crest contracts, his rainbow heck unbends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all his hundred hoops the languor crawls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each curve develops, every volute falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His broad back flattens as he spreads the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep consigns him to his lifeless reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flusht at the sight the pirates seize the spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ravaged Colchis rues the insidious toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes! fellow freemen, sons of high renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chant your loud peans, weave your civic crown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But know, the goddess you’ve so long adored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though now she scabbards your avenging sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls you to vigilance, to manlier cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove in peace the men she proved in wars:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Superior task! severer test of soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis here bold virtue plays her noblest role</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merits most of praise. The warrior’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though peal’d and chimed on all the tongues of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds less harmonious to the grateful mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than his who fashions and improves mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And what high meed your new vocation waits!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom, parturient with a hundred states,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confides them to your hand; the nascent prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claims all your care, your soundest wisdom tries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah nurture, temper, train your infant charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its force develop and its life enlarge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfold each day some adolescent grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some right recognise or some duty trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mold a fair model for the realms of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call moral nature to a second birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach, renovate the world’s great social plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here commence the sober sense of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For lo in other climes and elder states</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What strange inversion all his works awaits!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From age to age, on every peopled shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalks the fell Demon of despotic power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps in his march the mounds of art away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blots with his breath the trembling disk of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treads down whole nations every stride he takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wraps their labors in his fiery flakes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As Anarch erst around his regions hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrecks, long crusht of time’s anterior world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While nature mourn’d, in wild confusion tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her suns extinguisht and her systems lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light, life and instinct shared the dreary trance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gravitation fled the field of chance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No laws remain’d of matter, motion, space;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time lost his count, the universe his place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Order came, in her cerulean robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And launcht and rein’d the renovated globes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stockt with harmonious worlds the vast Inane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Archt her new heaven and fixt her boundless reign:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So kings convulse the moral frame, the base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the codes that can accord the race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so from their broad grasp, their deadly ban,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis yours to snatch this earth, to raise regenerate man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My friends, I love your fame; I joy to raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high toned anthem of my country’s praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sing her victories, virtues, wisdom, weal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boast with loud voice the patriot pride I feel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm wild I sing; and, to her failings blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mislead myself, perhaps mislead mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land that I love! is this the whole we owe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy pride to pamper, thy fair face to show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwells there no blemish where such glories shine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lurks no spot in that bright sun of thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark! a dread voice, with heaven-astounding strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swells like a thousand thunders o’er the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls and reverberates around thy hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hesper’s heart with pangs paternal fills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hearst him not; ’tis Atlas, throned sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great brother guardian of old Afric’s clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High o’er his coast he rears his frowning form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erlooks and calms his sky-borne fields of storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flings off the clouds that round his shoulders hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breaks from clogs of ice his trembling tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While far through space with rage and grief he glares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaves his hoar head and shakes the heaven he bears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Son of my sire! O latest brightest birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sprang from his fair spouse, prolific earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Hesper, say what sordid ceaseless hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impels thee thus to mar my elder state?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our sire assign’d thee thy more glorious reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secured and bounded by our laboring main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That main (though still my birthright name it bear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sails o’ershadow, thy brave children share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I grant it thus; while air surrounds the ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let breezes blow, let oceans roll for all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thy proud sons, a strange ungenerous race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enslave my tribes, and each fair world disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provoke wide vengeance on their lawless land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bolt ill placed in thy forbearing hand.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enslave my tribes! then boast their cantons free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preach faith and justice, bend the sainted knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invite all men their liberty to share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek public peace, defy the assaults of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plant, reap, consume, enjoy their fearless toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tame their wild floods to fatten still their soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enrich all nations with their nurturing store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rake with venturous fluke each wondering shore.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enslave my tribes! what, half mankind imban,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then read, expound, enforce the rights of man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prove plain and clear how nature’s hand of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast all men equal in her human mold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fibres, feelings, reasoning powers the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wants await them, like desires inflame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through former times with learned book they tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revise past ages and rejudge the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Write, speak, avenge, for ancient sufferings feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impale each tyrant on their pens of steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declare how freemen can a world create,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaves and masters ruin every state.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enslave my tribes! and think, with dumb disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scape this arm and prove my vengeance vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But look! methinks beneath my foot I ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few chain’d things that seem no longer men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sons perchance! whom Barbary’s coast can tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweets of that loved scourge they wield so well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Link’d in a line, beneath the driver’s goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See how they stagger with their lifted load;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shoulder’d rock, just wrencht from off my hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wet with drops their straining orbs distil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galls, grinds them sore, along the rarnpart led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the chain clanking counts the steps they tread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By night close bolted in the bagnio’s gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think how they ponder on their dreadful doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recall the tender sire, the weeping bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The home, far sunder’d by a waste of tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brood all the ties that once endear’d them there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, strung stronger, edge their keen despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till here a fouler fiend arrests their pace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plague, with his burning breath and bloated face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With saffron eyes that through the dungeon shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black tumors bursting from the groin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalks o’er the slave; who, cowering on the sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrinks from the Demon and invokes his God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucks hot contagion with his quivering breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rackt with rending torture sinks in death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor shall these pangs atone the nation’s crime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far heavier vengeance, in the march of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attends them still; if still they dare debase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold inthrall’d the millions of my race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vengeance that shall shake the world’s deep frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That heaven abhors and hell might shrink to name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature, long outraged, delves the crusted sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And molds the mining mischief dark and drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Europa too the penal shock shall find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rude soul-selling monsters of mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Alps and Andes at their bases meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth’s mid caves to lock their granite feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heave their broad spines, expand each breathing lobe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with their massy members rib the globe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her cauldron’d floods of fire their blast prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her wallowing womb of subterranean war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits but the fissure that my wave shall find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To force the foldings of the rocky rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crash your curst continent, and whirl on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vast avulsion vaulting through the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling far the bursting fragments, scattering wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks, mountains, nations o’er the swallowing tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging and surging with alternate sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They storm the day-vault and lay bare the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toss, tumble, plow their place, then slow subside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swell each ocean as their bulk they hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two oceans dasht in one! that climbs and roars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeks in vain the exterminated shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep drencht hemisphere. Far sunk from day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It crumbles, rolls, it churns the settling sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns up each prominence, heaves every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pierce once more the landless length of tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till some poized Pambamarca looms at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dim lone island in the watery waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourns all his minor mountains wreckt and hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands the sad relic of a ruin’d world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attests the wrath our mother kept in store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rues her judgments on the race she bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No saving Ark around him rides the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Dove weak-wing’d her footing finds again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own bald eagle skims alone the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darts from all points of heaven her searching eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kens through the gloom her ancient rock of rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And finds her cavern’d crag, her solitary nest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus toned the Titan his tremendous knell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lasht his ocean to a loftier swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth groans responsive and with laboring woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leans o’er the surge and stills the storm he throws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fathers and friends, I know the boding fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of angry genii and of rending spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assail not souls like yours; whom science bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through shadowy nature leads with surer light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom she strips the heavens of love and hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes from Jove’s hand the brandisht bolt of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives each effect its own indubious cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divides her moral from her physic laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows where the virtues find their nurturing food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men their motives to be just and good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You scorn the Titan’s threat; nor shall I strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The powers of pathos in a task so vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Afric’s wrongs to sing; for what avails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To harp for you these known familiar tales;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tongue mute misery, and re-rack the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crimes oft copied from that bloody scroll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Slavery pens her woes? though ’tis but there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We learn the weight that mortal life can bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale might startle still the accustom’d ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still shake the nerve that pumps the pearly tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melt every heart and through the nation gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a voice to break the barbarous chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why to sympathy for guidance fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Her aids uncertain and of scant supply)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When your own self-excited sense affords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guide more sure, and every sense accords?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where strong self-interest join’d with duty lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where doing right demands no sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where profit, pleasure, life-expanding fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>League their allurements to support the claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis safest there the impleaded cause to trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men well instructed will be always just.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From slavery then your rising realms to save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regard the master, notice not the slave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consult alone for freemen, and bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your best, your only cares to keep them so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyrants are never free; and, small and great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All masters must be tyrants soon or late;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So nature works; and oft the lordling knave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns out at once a tyrant and a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struts, cringes, bullies, begs, as courtiers must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes one a god, another treads in dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fears all alike, and filches whom he can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But knows no equal, finds no friend in man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, would you not be slaves, with lords and kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then be not masters; there the danger springs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole crude system that torments this earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rank, privation, privilege of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False honor, fraud, corruption, civil jars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rage of conquest and the curse of wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pandora’s total shower, all ills combined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That erst o’erwhelm’d and still distress mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boxt up secure in your deliberate hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait your behest, to fix or fly this land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Equality of Right is nature’s plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And following nature is the march of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er he deviates in the least degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, free himself, he would be more than free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baseless column, rear’d to bear his bust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls as he mounts and whelms him in the dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>See Rome’s rude sires, with autocratic gait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tread down their tyrant and erect their state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their state secured, they deem it wise and brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every freeman should command a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flusht with franchise of his camp and town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rove through the world and hunt the nations down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master and man the same vile spirit gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rome chains the world, and wears herself the chains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mark modern Europe with her feudal codes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serfs, villains, vassals, nobles, kings and gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All slaves of different grades, corrupt and curst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With high and low, for senseless rank athirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wage endless wars; not fighting to be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But <i xml:lang="la">cujum pecus</i>, whose base herd they’ll be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too much of Europe, here transplanted o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed feudal feelings on your tented shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought sable serfs from Afric, call’d it gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And urged your sires to forge the fatal chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, the tents o’erturn’d, the war dogs fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now fearless Freedom rears at last her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matcht with celestial Peace⁠—my friends, beware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shade the splendors of so bright a pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complete their triumph, fix their firm abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purge all privations from your liberal code,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restore their souls to men, give earth repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And save your sons from slavery, wars and woes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Based on its rock of Right your empire lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On walls of wisdom let the fabric rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserve your principles, their force unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let nations prove them and let kings behold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><strong>Equality</strong>, your first firm-grounded stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then <strong>free election</strong>; then your <strong>federal band</strong>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This holy Triad should forever shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great compendium of all rights divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creed of all schools, whence youths by millions draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their themes of right, their decalogues of law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till men shall wonder (in these codes inured)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How wars were made, how tyrants were endured.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then shall your works of art superior rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fruits perfume a larger length of skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canals careering climb your sunbright hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vein the green slopes and strow their nurturing rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through tunnel’d heights and sundering ridges glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rob the rich west of half Kenhawa’s tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mix your wide climates, all their stores confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plant new ports in every midland mound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your lawless Mississippi, now who slimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drowns and desolates his waste of climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ribb’d with your dikes, his torrent shall restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask your leave to travel to the main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won from his wave while rising cantons smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rear their glad nations and reward their toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Nile’s proud flood to human hands of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised and resign’d his tide-created shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d from his Ethiop hills their hardy swains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waved their harvests o’er his newborn plains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s richest realm from his tamed current sprung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There nascent science toned her infant tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught the young arts their tender force to try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To state the seasons and unfold the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till o’er the world extended and refined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rule the destinies of humankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now had Columbus well enjoy’d the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armies vanquisht and of fleets in flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all Hesperia’s heaven the darkness flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And colon crowds to sovereign sages grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cast new glories o’er the changing clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guardian Power reversed the flight of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll’d back the years that led their course before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretcht out immense the wild uncultured shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shifts the total scene, and rears to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arts and the men that useful arts pursue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er the canvas when the painter’s mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows with a future landscape well design’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Panorama’s wondrous aid he calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crowd whole realms within his circling walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakes, fields and forests, ports and navies rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new creation to his kindling eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smiles o’er all; and in delightful strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pencil moves and calls the whole to life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So while Columbia’s patriarch stood sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw rude nature clothe the trackless clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green banks heave, the winding currents pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bays and harbors cleave the yielding shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The champaigns spread, the solemn groves arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rough mountains lengthen round the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all their bounds he traced with skilful ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unform’d seats and future walks of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Markt where the field should bloom, the pennon play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great cities grow and empires claim their sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, sudden waked by Hesper’s waving hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rose obedient round the cultured land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In western tracts, where still the wildmen tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sea to sea an inland commerce spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dim streams and through the gloomy grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trading bauds their cumbrous burdens move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Furs, peltry, drugs, and all the native store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of midland realms descended to the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where summer suns, along the northern coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feeble force dissolve the chains of frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prolific waves the scaly nations trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tempt the toils of man’s laborious race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though rich Brazilian strands, beneath the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shells of pearl and sparkling pebbles hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While for the gaudy prize, a venturous train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunge the dark deep and brave the surging main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag forth the shining gewgaws into air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stud a sceptre or emblaze a star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far wealthier stores these genial tides display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And works less dangerous with their spoils repay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hero saw the hardy crews advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the long line and aim the barbed lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Load the deep floating barks, and bear abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every land the life-sustaining food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renascent swarms by nature’s care supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeople still the shoals and fin the fruitful tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where southern streams through broad savannas bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rice-clad vales their verdant rounds extend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tobago’s plant its leaf expanding yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maize luxuriant clothes a thousand fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeds, herds and flocks o’er northern regions rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embrown the hill and wanton through the grove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woodlands wide their sturdy honors bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pines, the liveoaks to the shores descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There couch the keels, the crooked ribs arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hulls heave aloft and mastheads mount the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launcht on the deep o’er every wave they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed tropic isles and Europe’s looms supply.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To nurse the arts and fashion freedom’s lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young schools of science rise along the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great without pomp their modest walls expand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harvard and Yale and Princeton grace the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penn’s student halls his youths with gladness greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On James’s bank Virginian Muses meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Manhattan’s mart collegiate domes command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bosom’d in groves, see growing Dartmouth stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright o’er its realm reflecting solar fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On yon tall hill Rhode Island’s seat aspires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thousands of humbler name around them rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where homebred freemen seize the solid prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixt in small spheres, with safer beams to shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They reach the useful and refuse the fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found, on its proper base, the social plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broad plain truths, the common sense of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His obvious wants, his mutual aids discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rights familiarize, his duties learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel moral fitness all its force dilate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embrace the village and comprise the state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each rustic here who turns the furrow’d soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maid, the youth that ply mechanic toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In equal rights, in useful arts inured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know their just claims and see their claims secured;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They watch their delegates, each law revise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its faults designate and its merits prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey, but scrutinize; and let the test</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sage experience prove and fix the best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, fired by virtue’s animating flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The preacher’s task persuasive sages claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mold religion to the moral mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bands of peace to harmonize mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To life, to light, to promised joys above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soften’d soul with ardent hope to move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dark intolerance blinds the zealous throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No arm of power attendant on their tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vext Inquisition with her flaming brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuns their mild march nor dares approach the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though different creeds their priestly robes denote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their orders various and their rites remote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one their voice, their labors all combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights of the world and friends of humankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the bright galaxy o’er heaven displays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various stars the same unbounded blaze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where great and small their mingling rays unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth and skies exchange the friendly light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lo, my son, that other sapient band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torch of science flaming in their hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nature’s range their searching souls aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wake to life the canvas and the lyre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixt in sublimest thought, behold them rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>World after world unfolding to their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead, light, allure them through the total plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give new guidance to the paths of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yon meteor-mantled hill see Franklin tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s awful thunders tolling o’er his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convolving clouds the billowy skies deform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forky flames emblaze the blackening storm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the descending streams around him burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glance on his rod and with his finger turn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bids conflicting fulminants expire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guided blast, and holds the imprison’d fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, when doubling storms the vault o’erspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The livid glare shall strike thy race with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor towers nor temples shuddering with the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink in the flames and shake the sheeted ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well tried wires, that every tempest wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall teach mankind to ward the bolts of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pointed gold o’ertop the trembling spire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lead from untoucht walls the harmless flre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d with his fame while distant climes rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever lightning shines or thunder rears its voice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And see sage Rittenhouse with ardent eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift the long tube and pierce the starry sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear in his view the circling planets roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suns and satellites their course control.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He marks what laws the widest wanderers bind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Copies creation in his forming mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees in his hall the total semblance rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mimics there the labors of the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There student youths without their tubes behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spangled heavens their mystic maze unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowded schools their cheerful chambers grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the spheres that cleave the vast of space.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To guide the sailor in his wandering way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Godfrey’s glass<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> reverse the beams of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lifted quadrant to the eye displays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From adverse skies the counteracting rays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marks, as devious sails bewilder’d roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each nice gradation from the steadfast pole.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>West<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> with his own great soul the canvas warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creates, inspires, impassions human forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spurns critic rules, and seizing safe the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks down the former frightful bounds of Art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ancient manners, with exclusive reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From half mankind withheld her fair domain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He calls to life each patriot, chief or sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garb’d in the dress and drapery of his age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again bold Regulus to death returns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again her falling Wolfe Britannia mourns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lahogue, Boyne, Cressy, Nevilcross demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gain fresh lustre from his copious hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Lear stalks wild with woes, the gods defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insults the tempest and outstorms the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Edward in arms to frowning combat moves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or won to pity by the queen he loves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spares the devoted <em>Six</em>, whose deathless deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserves the town his vengeance doom’d to bleed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With rival force, see Copley’s pencil trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air of action and the charms of face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair in his tints unfold the scenes of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The senate listens and the peers debate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale consternation every heart appals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In act to speak, when death-struck Chatham fails.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bids dread Calpe cease to shake the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Elliott’s arm the host of Bourbon saves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er sail-wing’d batteries sinking in the flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid flames and darkness, drencht in hostile blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britannia’s sons extend their generous hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue foes from death and bear them to the land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fired with the martial deeds that bathed in gore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brave companions on his native shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trumbull with daring hand their fame recalls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shades with night Quebec’s beleagured walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through flashing flames, that midnight war supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assailants yield, their great Montgomery dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Bunker height, through floods of hostile fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Putnam toils till all the troops retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Warren, pierced with balls, at last lies low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaves a victory to the wasted foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britannia too his glowing tint shall claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour new splendor on her Calpean fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leads her bold sortie and from their towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erturns the Gallic and Iberian powers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>See rural seats of innocence and ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High tufted towers and walks of waving trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white waves dashing on the craggy shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meandering streams and meads of mingled flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where nature’s sons their wild excursions tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In just design from Taylor’s pencil spread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Stuart and Brown the moving portrait raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each rival stroke the force of life conveys;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heroes and beauties round their tablets stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rise unfading from their plastic hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each breathing form preserves its wonted grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the soul stands speaking in the face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two kindred arts the swelling statue heave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wake the dead wax and teach the stone to live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the bold chisel claims the rugged strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse the sceptred marble into life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Wright’s fair hands the livelier fire control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In waxen forms she breathes impassion’d soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pencil’d tint o’er moulded substance glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And different powers the peerless art compose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief, rage and fear beneath her fingers start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll the wild eye and pour the bursting heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s dead fathers wait her wakening call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And distant ages fill the storied hall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To equal fame ascends thy tuneful throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boast of genius and the pride of song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught from the cast of every age and clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lays shall triumph o’er the lapse of time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With lynx-eyed glance through nature far to pierce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the powers and every charm of verse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each science opening in his ample mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fancy glowing and his taste refined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Trumbull lead the train. His skilful hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurls the keen darts of satire round the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride, knavery, dullness feel his mortal stings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listening virtue triumphs while he sings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britain’s foil’d sons, victorious now no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In guilt retiring from the wasted shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strive their curst cruelties to hide in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world resounds them in his deathless strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On wings of faith to elevate the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the bourn of earth’s benighted pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Dwight’s high harp the epic Muse sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hails her new empire in the western clime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tuned from the tones by seers seraphic sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven in his eye and rapture on his tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice revives old Canaan’s promised land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-fought fields of Jacob’s chosen band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hanniel’s fate, proud faction finds its doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ai’s midnight flames light nations to their tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In visions bright supernal joys are given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the dark futurities of heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While freedom’s cause his patriot bosom warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In counsel sage nor inexpert in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Humphreys glorious from the field retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheathe the glad sword and string the soothing lyre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lyre which erst, in hours of dark despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roused the sad realms to finish well the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er fallen friends, with all the strength of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fraternal sighs in his strong numbers flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His country’s wrongs, her duties, dangers, praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire his full soul and animate his lays:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom and War with equal joy shall own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fond a votary and so brave a son.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
