<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Argument</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Natives of America appear in vision⁠—Their manners and characters⁠—Columbus demands the cause of the dissimilarity of men in different countries⁠—Hesper replies, That the human body is composed of a due proportion of the elements suited to the place of its first formation; that these elements, differently proportioned, produce all the changes of health, sickness, growth and decay, and may likewise produce any other changes which occasion the diversity of men; that these elemental proportions are varied, not more by climate than temperature and other local circumstances; that the mind is likewise in a state of change, and will take its physical character from the body and from external objects: examples⁠—Inquiry concerning the first peopling of America⁠—View of Mexico⁠—Its destruction by Cortez⁠—View of Cusco and Quito, cities of Peru⁠—Tradition of Capac and Oella, founders of the Peruvian empire⁠—Columbus inquires into their real history⁠—Hesper gives an account of their origin and relates the stratagems they used in establishing that empire.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>High o’er his world as thus Columbus gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hesper still the changing scene emblazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round all the realms increasing lustre flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised new wonders to the Patriarch’s view.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw at once, as far as eye could rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like scattering herds, the swarthy people move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tribes innumerable; all the waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide as their walks, a varying shadow cast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As airy shapes, beneath the moon’s pale eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>People the clouds that sail the midnight sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance through the grove and flit along the glade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast their grisly phantoms on the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So move the hordes in thickets half conceal’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or vagrant stalking through the fenceless field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here tribes untamed, who scorn to fix their home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er shadowy streams and trackless deserts roam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While others there in settled hamlets rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And corn-clad vales a happier state attest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crowds of war painted chiefs, athirst for gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat their own breasts and tone their hideous roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hill to hill the startling war song flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tribes on tribes in dread disorder rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Track the mute foe and scour the howling wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud as a storm, ungovern’d as a flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or deep in groves the silent ambush lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead the false flight, decoy and seize their prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their captives torture, butcher for their food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suck the warm veins and grime their cheeks with blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In doubt he stood and question’d thus the seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What class of nature’s sons behold we here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their human frames with brutal souls combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No power can tame them and no arts refine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can these be fashion’d on the social plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or boast a lineage with the race of man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When found in that my first discover’d isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They used no force, and seem’d to know no guile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A timorous herd like harmless roes they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call’d us gods, from whom their tribes began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when, their fears allay’d, in us they trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men of this earth, a social mortal race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Spanish blood their eyes with joy beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A frantic rage their changing bosoms swell’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They roused their bands from numerous hills afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feast their souls on ruin, waste and war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor plighted vows nor sure defeat control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same indignant savageness of soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tell then, my seer, from what dire sons of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brutal people drew their ancient birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If these forgotten shores and useless tides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have form’d them different from the world besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born to subjection, when in happier time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nobler race should reach their fruitful clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if a common source all nations claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lineage, form and faculties the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sovereign secret cause, yet undisplay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This wondrous change in nature’s work has made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why various powers of soul and tints of face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In different lands diversify the race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the Guide: Unnumber’d causes lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth and sea, in climate, soil and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fire the soul or damp the genial flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And work their wonders on the human frame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See beauty, form and color change with place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here charms of health the lively visage grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There pale diseases float in every wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deform the figure, and degrade the mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From earth’s own elements thy race at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose into life, the children of the dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These kindred elements, by various use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourish the growth and every change produce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In each ascending stage the man sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breath, his food, his physic and his bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In due proportions where these atoms lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A certain form their equal aids supply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while unchanged the efficient causes reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age following age the certain form maintain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But where crude atoms disproportion’d rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast their sickening vapors round the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike that harmony of human frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That moulded first and reproduce the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tribes ill form’d, attempering to the clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still vary downward with the years of time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More perfect some and some less perfect yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their reproductions in this wondrous field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till fixt at last their characters abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And local likeness feeds their local pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul too, varying with the change of clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeble or fierce, or groveling or sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forms with the body to a kindred plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lives the same, a nation or a man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet think not clime alone the tint controls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every shore, by altitude of poles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A different cast the glowing zone demands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Paria’s groves, from Tombut’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> burning sands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unheeded agents, for the sense too fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every pulse, with every thought combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through air and ocean with their changes run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe from the ground or circle with the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where these long continents their shores outspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the same form all different tribes pervade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all alike the fertile forests bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, uncultured, shed a solemn gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all, great nature’s boldest features rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink into vales or tower amid the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams darkly winding stretch a broader sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The groves and mountains bolder walks display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dread sublimity informs the whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rears a dread sublimity of soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet time and art shall other changes find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And open still and vary still the mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The countless clans that tread these dank abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who glean spontaneous fruits and range the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixt here for ages in their swarthy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Display the wild complexion of the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet when the hordes to happy nations rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth by culture warms<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> the genial skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fairer tint and more majestic grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall flush their features and exalt the race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While milder arts, with social joys refined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspire new beauties in the growing mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy followers too, old Europe’s noblest pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When future gales shall wing them o’er the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ruddier hue and deeper shade shall gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stalk in statelier figures,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While nature’s grandeur lifts the eye abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er these last labors of the forming God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wing’d on a wider glance the venturous soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids greater powers and bolder thoughts unroll;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage, the chief, the patriot unconfined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield the weak world and meliorate mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But think not thou, in all the range of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That different pairs each different cast began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or tribes distinct, by signal marks confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were born to serve or subjugate the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Hero heard and thus resumed the strain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who led these wanderers o’er the dreary main?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could their weak sires, unskill’d in human lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build the bold bark to seek an unknown shore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shore so distant from the world beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dark the tempests and so wild the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Greece and Tyre and all who tempt the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have shunn’d the task and left the fame to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When first thy roving race, the Power replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn’d by the stars the devious sail to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From stormy Hellespont explored the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought the limits of the Midland sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Alcides form’d his impious plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To check the sail and bound the steps of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hand had led them to this rich abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And braved the wrath of that strong demigod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven from the Calpian strait, a hapless train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll’d on the waves that sweep the western main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storms from the orient blacken’d heaven with shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor sun nor stars could yield their wonted aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a darksome day o’erwhelm’d and tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sails, their oars in swallowing surges lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length, the clouds withdrawn, they sad descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their course directing from their native sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hope remains; far onward o’er the zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trade wind bears them with the circling sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till wreckt and stranded here, the sylvan coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receives to lonely seats the suffering host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful vales invite their steps to roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renounce their sorrows and forget their home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revolving years their ceaseless wanderings led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from their sons descending nations spread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These in the torrid tracts began their sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose cultured fields their growing arts display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northern tribes a later stock may boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A race descended from the Asian coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the arctic, where Anadir glides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow strait the impinging worlds divides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Tartar fugitives from famine sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And migrant tribes these fruitful shorelands hail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spoke; when Behren’s pass before them lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moving nations on the margin stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick swarming, venturous; sail and oar they ply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb on the surge and o’er the billows fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when autumnal storms awake their force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storks foreboding tempt their southern course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the fields collecting throngs arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mount on the wing and crowd along the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, to his eye, from bleak Tartaria’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through isles and seas the gathering people pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change their cold regions for a happier strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leap from the wave and tread the welcome land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In growing tribes extend their southern sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wander wide beneath a warmer day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But why, the Chief replied, if ages past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led the bold vagrants to so mild a waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If human souls for social compact given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imprest their nature with the stamp of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why the wild woods for ever must they rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor arts nor social joys their passions move?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long is the lapse of ages, since thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conducted here thy first adventurous band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On other shores, in every eastern clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that unletter’d, distant tract of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What arts have sprung, imperial powers to grace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sceptres sway’d the many-master’d race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guilt, grandeur, glory from their seats been hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dire divulsions shook the changing world!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere Rome’s first Eagle clave the frighted air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Sparta form’d her deathlike sons of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Tyre and Ilion saw their towers arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Memphian pyramids usurpt the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These tribes have forester’d the fruitful zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their seats unsettled and their name unknown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hesper to this replied: A scanty train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that far age approacht the wide domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide domain with game and fruitage crown’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supplied their food uncultured from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By nature form’d to rove, the human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of freedom fond, will ramble unconfined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all the region fills, and rival right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrains their steps and bids their force unite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When common safety builds a common cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conforms their interest and inspires their laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mutual checks their different manners blend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fields bloom joyous and their walls ascend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here to the vagrant tribes no bounds arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They form’d no union, as they fear’d no foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering and wild, from sire to son they stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand ages, scorning every sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what a world their seatless tribes embraced!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A total hemisphere’s extended waste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the lands lengthen, see the rivers roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each blue main, each far dissunder’d pole!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But lo, at last the destined course is run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The realms are peopled and their arts begun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where yon mid region elevated lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few famed cities glitter to the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There move in eastern pomp the toils of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And temples heave magnificently great.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Hero turn’d to greet the novel sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When three far splendors, yet confusedly bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose like a constellation; till more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinctly markt their different sites appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diverging still, beneath their roofs of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three cities gay their mural towers unfold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, led by visions of his guiding God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seer of Patmos o’er the welkin trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the new heaven its flamy cope unbend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walls and gates and spiry domes descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well known sacred city grows, and gains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her new built towers, her renovated fanes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden skies and suns and rainbows crown’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jerusalem looks forth and lights the world around.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bright on the north imperial Mexic rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mimic morn her sparkling vanes disclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her opening streets concentred hues display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give back the sun, and shed internal day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circling wall with guardian turrets frown’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lookt defiance to the realms around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glimmering lake without the wall retires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inverts the towers, and seems a grove of spires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Proud o’er the midst, on columns lifted high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A giant structure claims a loftier sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the tall gates sublimer arches bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courts larger lengthen, bolder walks ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starr’d with superior gems the porches shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak the royal residence within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, deckt in state robes on his golden throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid suppliant kings, dread Montezuma shone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild in his eye a temper’d grandeur sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High seem’d his soul, with conscious power elate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aspect open, social and serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enclosed by favorites, and of friends unseen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Round the rich throne, in various lustre dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gems undistinguisht cast a changing light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sapphire and emerald soften down the scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold azure mingling with the vernal green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pearl, amber, ruby warmer flames unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And diamonds brighten from the burning gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the dome the living blazes blend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoot their rainbows where the arches bend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every ceiling, painted light and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Symbolic forms their graphic art display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recording, confident of endless fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each feat of arms, each patriarchal name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Memphian hieroglyphs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> to stretch the span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of memory frail in momentary man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pour’d through the gates a hundred nations greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throng the rich mart and line each ample street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ply different labors, walls and structures rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or till the fields or train the ranks of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through spreading states the skirts of empire bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New temples rise and other plains extend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice ten wide provinces, in culture gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bless the same king and daily firm the sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A smile benignant kindling in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O happy realm! the glad Columbus cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the midland, safe from every foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy arts shall flourish as thy virtues grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To endless years thy rising fame extend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sires of nations from thy sons descend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May no gold-thirsty race thy temples tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insult thy rites nor heap thy plains with dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Bovadilla seize the tempting spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dark Ovando, no religious<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> Boyle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mimic priesthood grave or robed in state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erwhelm thy glories in oblivious fate!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Vain are thy hopes, the sainted Power replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These rich abodes from Spanish hordes to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or teach hard guilt and cruelty to spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guardless prize of sacrilegious war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not the vulture mid the field of slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where base and brave promiscuous strow the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the young hero in the pride of charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours brighter crimson o’er his spotless arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pass the tempting prey and glut his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On harder flesh and carnage black with age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all alike he darts his eager eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whets the blunt beak and hovers down the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From countless corses picks the dainty food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And screams and fattens in the purest blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the vile hosts, that hither trace thy way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On happiest tribes with fiercest fury prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine the dread task, O Cortez, here to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What unknown crimes can heighten human woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On these fair fields the blood of realms to pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tread sceptres down and print thy steps in gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gold and carnage swell thy sateless mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And live and die the blackest of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He gains the shore. Behold his fortress rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fleet high flaming<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> suffocates the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The march begins; the nations in affright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quake as he moves and wage the fruitless fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the rich provinces he bends his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kings in his chain and kingdoms for his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the imperial town infuriate falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pours destruction o’er its batter’d walls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In quest of peace great Montezuma stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sovereign supplicant with lifted hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings all his treasure, yields the regal sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids vassal millions their new lord obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plies the victor with incessant prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through ravaged realms the harmless race to spare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But treasures, tears and sceptres plead in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor threats can move him nor a world restrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While blind religion’s prostituted name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And monkish fury guide the sacred flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er crowded fanes their fires unhallow’d bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb the wide roofs, the lofty towers ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour through the lowering skies the smoky flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stain the fields and quench the blaze in blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus heard; and with a heaving sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropt the full tear that started in his eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hapless day! his trembling voice replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saw my wandering pennon mount the tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had but the lamp of heaven to that bold sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er markt the passage nor awoke the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught foreign prows these peopled shores to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor led those tigers forth to fang mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had the tribes beneath these bounteous skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen their walls widen and their harvests rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the long tracts of time their glory shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad as the day and lasting as the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The growing realms, behind thy shield that rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paternal monarch, still thy power had blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoy’d the pleasures that surround thy throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Survey’d thy virtues and improved their own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forgive me prince, this luckless arm hath led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storm unseen that hovers o’er thy head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught the dark sons of slaughter where to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize thy crown and seal the nation’s doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arm, sleeping empire, meet the murderous band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive back the invaders, save the sinking land⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vain the call! behold the streaming blood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive me nature, and forgive me God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While sorrows thus his patriarch pride control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hesper reproving sooths his tender soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father of this new world, thy tears give o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let virtue grieve and heaven be blamed no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough for man, with persevering mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To act his part and strive to bless his kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough for thee o’er thy dark age to soar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raise to light that long-secluded shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this my guardian care thy youth inspired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To virtue rear’d thee and with glory fired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade in thy plan each distant world unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wing’d thy vessel for the venturous flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor think the labors vain; to good they tend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyrants like these shall ne’er defeat their end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their end that opens far beyond the scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man’s past efforts and his present hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long has thy race, to narrow shores confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trod the same round that fetter’d fast the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, borne on bolder plumes, with happier flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s broad bounds unfolding to the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind shall soar; the coming age expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their arts and lore to every barbarous land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buried gold, drawn copious from the mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give wings to commerce and the world refine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now to yon southern cities turn thy view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mark the rival seats of rich Peru.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See Quito’s airy plains, exalted high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loftier temples rise along the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And elder Cusco’s shining roofs unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flame on the day and shed their suns of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another range, in these pacific climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads a broad theatre for unborn crimes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Cortez shall their treasures view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rage rekindle and his guilt renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His treason, fraud and every fell design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O curst Pizarro, shall revive in thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here reigns a prince, whose heritage proclaims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long bright lineage of imperial names;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the brave roll of Incas love to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The distant father of their realm and race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal Capac. He in youthful pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With young Oella his illustrious bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Announced their birth divine; a race begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven, the children of their god the Sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By him sent forth a polisht state to frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crush the fiend gods that human victims claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cheerful rites their pure devotions pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bright orb<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> that gives the changing day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On this great plan, as children of the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They plied their arts and saw their hamlets rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of their works, and sacred to their fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yon proud metropolis received its name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cusco the seat of states, in peace design’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach o’er earth and civilize mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succeeding sovereigns spread their limits far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tamed every tribe and sooth’d the rage of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Quito bow’d; and all the heliac zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the same sceptre and confirm’d the throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Near Cusco’s wall, where still their hallow’d isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bathes in its lake and wears its verdant smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where these prime parents of the sceptred line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their advent made and spoke their birth divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold their temple stand; its glittering spires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light the glad waves and aid their father’s fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Archt in the walls of gold, its portal gleams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With various gems of intermingling beams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flaming from the front, with borrow’d ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A diamond circlet gives the rival day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whose bright face forever looks abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labor’d image of the radiant God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There dwells the royal priest, whose inner shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conceals his lore; ’tis there his voice divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaims the laws; and there a cloister’d quire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of holy virgins keep the sacred fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus heard; and curious to be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What pious fraud such wondrous changes wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Askt by what mystic charm, in that dark age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They quell’d in savage souls the barbarous rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By leagues of peace combined a wide domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught the virtues in their laws to reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long is the tale; but though their labors rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By years obscured,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> in flowery fiction drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My voice, said Hesper, shall revive their name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give their merits to immortal fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by his father’s wars, in early prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Capac left his native northern clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clime where Quito since hath rear’d her fanes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now no more her barbarous rites maintains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw these vales in richer blooms array’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tribes more numerous haunt the woodland shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw rival clans their local gods adore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their altars staining with their children’s gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet markt their reverence for the Sun, whose beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaims his bounties and his power supreme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sails in happier skies, diffusing good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demands no victim and receives no blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In peace return’d with his victorious sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New charms of glory all his soul inspire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To conquer nations on a different plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And build his greatness on the good of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By nature form’d for hardiest deeds of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall, bold and full-proportion’d rose his frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong moved his limbs; a mild majestic grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beam’d from his eyes and open’d in his face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the dark world his mind superior shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seem’d the semblance of his parent Sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though fame’s airy visions lift his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And future empires from his labors rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet softer fires his daring views control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mixt emotions fill his changing soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall genius rare that might the world improve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend to the milder voice of careless love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bounds his glories and forbids to part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bowers that woo’d his fluctuating heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shall the toils, imperial heroes claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire his brave bosom with a patriot flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid sceptres wait him on Peruvia’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loved Oella meet his eyes no more?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still unresolved he sought the lonely maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who plied her labors in the silvan shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her locks loose rolling mantle deep her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wave luxuriant round her slender waist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay wreaths of flowers her pensive brows adorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her white raiment mocks the light of morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her busy hand sustains a bending bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where cotton clusters spread their robes of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From opening pods unbinds the fleecy store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And culls her labors for the evening bower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For she, the first in all Hesperia, fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turning spindle with the twisting thread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woof, the shuttle follow’d her command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till various garments grew beneath her hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, while all her thoughts with Capac rove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through former scenes of innocence and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In distant fight his fancied dangers share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wait him glorious from the finisht war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blest with the ardent hope, her sprightly mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vesture white had for the prince design’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here she seeks the wool to web the fleece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred emblem of returning peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sudden his near approach the maid alarms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flew enraptured to her yielding arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lost, dissolving in a softer flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His distant empire and the fire of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length, retiring through the homeward field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glowing souls to cooler converse yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er various scenes of blissful life they ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thus the warrior to the maid began:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long have we markt the inauspicious reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waits our sceptre in this rough domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soil ungrateful and a wayward race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their game but scanty and confined their space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where late my steps the southern war pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fertile plains grew boundless as I view’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More numerous nations trod the grassy wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joyous nature more delightful smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No changing seasons there the flowers deform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dread volcano and no mountain storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rains ne’er invade nor livid lightnings play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor clouds obscure the radiant king of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But while his orb, in ceaseless glory bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls the rich day and fires his stars by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unbounded fullness flows beneath his reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seas yield their treasures, fruits adorn the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His melting mountains spread their annual flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night sheds her dews, the day-breeze fans the god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis he inspires me with the vast design</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form those nations to a sway divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destroy the rites of every demon Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose altars smoke with sacrilegious gore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To laws and labor teach the tribes to yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And richer fruits to grace the cultured field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But great, my charmer, is the task of fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their faith to fashion and their lives to tame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a spacious wild these eyes must see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread dreary bounds between my love and me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yon bright godhead circle thrice the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each lonely evening number’d with a tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long robes of white<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> my shoulders must embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak my lineage of ethereal race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That simple men may reverence and obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The radiant offspring of the Power of day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When these my deeds the faith of nations gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And happy millions bless thy Capac’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall he feign a journey to the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the partner of his well-earn’d throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall descending kings the line sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till earth’s whole regions join the vast domain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Will then my fair, at my returning hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsake these wilds and hail a happier bower?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will she consenting now resume her smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send forth her warrior to his glorious toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, sweetly patient, wait the flight of days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crown our labors with immortal praise?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Silent the damsel heard; her moistening eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoke the full soul nor could her voice reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till softer accents sooth’d her wounded ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Composed her tumult and allay’d her fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not, heroic maid, my steps would part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While silent sorrows heave that tender heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oella’s peace more dear shall prove to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the realms that bound the raging sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thou, bright Sun, shalt bribe my soul to rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave one struggle in her lovely breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet think in tribes so vast, my gentle fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What millions merit our instructive care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How age to age leads on their joyless gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Habitual slaughter their poor piteous doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No social ties their wayward passions prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor peace nor pleasure treads the howling grove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid thousand heroes and a thousand fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fond Oella meets her Capac there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, taught by thee domestic joys to prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With softer charms the virgin race shall rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake new virtues, every grace improve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form their minds for happiness and love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah think, as future years through time descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wide creations on thy voice depend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like the Sun, whose all-delighting ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those mild regions gives his purest day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diffuse thy bounties, let me instant fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In three short moons the generous task I’ll try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then swift returning, I’ll conduct my fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where realms submissive wait her fostering care.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And will my prince, my Capac, borne away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through those dark wilds in quest of empire stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where tigers fierce command the shuddering wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men like tigers thirst for human blood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou no dangerous deed the course attends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, unaided by thy sire and friends?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even chains and death may meet my hero there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor his last groan could reach Oella’s ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But no! nor death nor chains shall Capac prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknown to her, while she has power to rove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close by thy side, where’er thy wanderings stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My equal steps shall measure all the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With borrow’d soul each chance of fate I’ll dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy toils to lessen and thy dangers share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick shall my ready hand two garments weave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sunny whiteness shall the tribes deceive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus clad, their homage shall secure our sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail us children of the god of day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lovely counsel pleased. The smiling chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approved her courage and dispell’d her grief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to their homely bower in haste they move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin their labors and prepare to rove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon grow the robes beneath her forming care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fond parents wed the wondrous pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whelm’d in grief beheld the following dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their joys all vanisht and their children gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine days they marcht; the tenth effulgent morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw their white forms that sacred isle adorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work begins; they preach to every band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-form’d fiction and their faith demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With various miracles their powers display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove their lineage and confirm their sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They train to different arts the hand of toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whirl the spindle and to spade the soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun’s bright march with pious finger trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his pale sister with her changing face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show how their bounties clothe the labor’d plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green maize shooting from its golden grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the white cotton tree’s expanding lobes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>File into threads, and swell to fleecy robes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the tamed llama aids the wondrous plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lends his garment to the loins of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The astonisht tribes believe, with glad surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods descended from the favoring skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adore their persons robed in shining white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive their laws and leave each horrid rite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build with assisting hands the golden throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail and bless the sceptre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span> of the Sun.
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
