<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Argument</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Actions of the Inca Capac⁠—A general invasion of his dominions threatened by the mountain savages⁠—Rocha, the Inca’s son, sent with a few companions to offer terms of peace⁠—His embassy⁠—His adventure with the worshippers of the volcano⁠—With those of the storm on the Andes⁠—Falls in with the savage armies⁠—Character and speech of Zamor, their chief⁠—Capture of Rocha and his companions⁠—Sacrifice of the latter⁠—Death song of Azonto⁠—War dance⁠—March of the savage armies down the mountains to Peru⁠—Incan army meets them⁠—Battle joins⁠—Peruvians terrified by an eclipse of the sun, and routed⁠—They fly to Cusco⁠—Grief of Oella, supposing the darkness to be occasioned by the death of Rocha⁠—Sun appears⁠—Peruvians from the city wall discover Rocha on an altar in the savage camp⁠—They march in haste out of the city and engage the savages⁠—Exploits of Capac⁠—Death of Zamor⁠—Recovery of Rocha and submission of the enemy.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now twenty years these children of the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld their gradual growing empire rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ruled with rigid but with generous care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diffused their arts and sooth’d the rage of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade yon tall temple<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> grace their favorite isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mines unfold, the cultured valleys smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those broad foundations bend their arches high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear imperial Cusco to the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wealth, wisdom, force consolidate the reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rude Andes to the western main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But frequent inroads from the savage bands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead fire and slaughter o’er the labor’d lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sack the temples, the gay fields deface</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vow destruction to the Incan race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king, undaunted in defensive war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repels their hordes and speeds their flight afar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stung with defeat, they range a wider wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rouse fresh tribes for future fields of blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where yon blue ridges hang their cliffs on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suns infulminate the stormful sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nations, temper’d to the turbid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe deadly strife and sigh for battle’s blare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis here they meditate, with one vast blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crush the race that rules the plains below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Capac with caution views the dark design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learns from all points what hostile myriads join,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeks in time by proffer’d leagues to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bloodless victory, and enlarge his reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His eldest hope, young Rocha, at his call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resigns his charge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> within the temple wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom began, with reverend forms of awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The functions grave of priesthood and of law.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In early youth, ere yet the ripening sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had three short lustres o’er his childhood run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince had learnt, beneath his father’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-framed code that sway’d the sacred land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rites mysterious served the Power divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepared the altar and adorn’d the shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Responsive hail’d with still returning praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each circling season that the god displays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooth’d with funereal hymns the parting dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At nuptial feasts the joyful chorus led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While evening incense and the morning song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose from his hand or trembled on his tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus form’d for empire ere he gain’d the sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rule with reverence and with power obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reflect the glories of the parent Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shine the Capac of his future throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Employ’d his docile years; till now from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rumor’d leagues proclaim approaching war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matured for active scenes he quits the shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid in council or in arms to shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amid the chieftains that the court compose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In modest mien the stripling pontiff rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverence bow’d, conspicuous o’er the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approach’d the throne and thus the sire addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great king of nations, heaven-descended sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy second heir has reacht the destined age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take these priestly robes; to his pure hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I yield them pure and wait thy kind command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should foes invade, permit this arm to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The toils, the triumphs, every chance of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this dread conflict all our force demands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one wide field to whelm the brutal bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour to the mountain gods their wonted food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And save thy realms from future leagues of blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet oh, may sovereign mercy first ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Propounded compact to the savage train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll go with terms of peace to spread thy sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And teach the blessings of the god of day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sire return’d: My great desire you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shield from slaughter and preserve the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bands of concord all their tribes to bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And live the friend and guardian of mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should strife begin, thy youthful arm shall share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The toils of glory through the walks of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But o’er their hills to seek alone the foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gain their confidence or brave their blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend their proud souls to reason’s voice divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claims hardier limbs and riper years than thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one of heavenly race the task requires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mystic rites control the solar fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the sooth’d godhead proves to faithless eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His love to man, his empire of the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some veteran chief, in those rough labors tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall aid thee on and go thy faithful guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er dreary heights thy sinking limbs sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach the dark wiles of each insidious train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all extremes of life thy voice attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In counsel lead thee or in arms defend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And three firm youths, thy chosen friends, shall go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn the climes and meditate the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wars of future years their skill may find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve the realm and save the savage kind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rise then, my son, first partner of my fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With early toils to build thy sacred name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In high behest, for his own legate known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaim the bounties of our sire the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell how his fruits beneath our culture rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His stars, how glorious, gem our cloudless skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how to us his hand hath kindly given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His peaceful laws, the purest grace of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With power to widen his terrestrial sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give our blessings where he gives the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, should the stubborn nations still prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shaft of slaughter for the barbarous war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell them we know to tread the crimson plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And god’s own children never yield to man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But ah, my child, with steps of caution go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ways are hideous and enraged the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood stains their altars, all their feasts are blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death their delight, and darkness reigns their god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tigers and vultures, storms and earthquakes share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their rites of worship and their spoils of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou, my Rocha, tempt too far their ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should those dear relics feed a murderous fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep sighs would rend thy wretched mother’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale Sun sink in clouds of darkness drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sire and mournful nations rue the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drew thy steps from these sad walls away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet go; ’tis virtue calls, and realms unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won by these works, may bless thy future throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millions of unborn souls in time may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their doom reversed and owe their peace to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deluded sires, with murdering hands no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed fancied demons with their children’s gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, sway’d by happier sceptres, here behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rites of freedom and the shrines of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be wise, be mindful of thy realm and throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God speed thy labors and preserve my son!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon the glad prince, in robes of white array’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d his attendants and the sire obey’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A diamond broad, in burning gold imprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Display’d the sun’s bright image on his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pearl-dropt girdle bound his waist below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the white lautu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> graced his lofty brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They journey’d forth, o’ermarching far the mound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flankt the kingdom on its Andean bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ridge after ridge through vagrant hordes they past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where each new tribe seem’d wilder than the last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all they preach and prove the solar sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climb fresh mountains on their tedious way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length, as through disparting clouds they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hills above them still obstruct the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While a dead calm o’er all the region stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a leaf could fan its parent wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden a strange portentous noise began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds fled wild, the beasts for shelter ran;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow, sullen, loud, with deep astounding blare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell the strong tones of subterranean war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind, before, beneath them groans the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth heaves and labors with the shuddering sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columns of smoke, that cap the rumbling height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll reddening far through heaven and choke the light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tottering steeps descend their cliffs of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountains reel, the valleys rend below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The headlong streams forget their usual round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrink and vanish in the gaping ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun descends; but night recalls in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her silent shades, to recommence her reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bursting mount gapes high, a sudden glare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coruscates wide, till all the purpling air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks into flame; it wheels and roars and raves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wraps the welkin in its folding waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light sailing cinders, through its vortex driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stream high and brighten to the midst of heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, following slow, full floods of boiling ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell, swoop aloft and through the concave roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torrents of molten rocks, on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead o’er the shelves of ice their fiery tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hills slide before them, skies around them burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towns sink beneath and heaving plains upturn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er many a league the flaming deluge hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps total nations from the staggering world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, at distance through the livid light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A busy concourse met their wondering sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince drew near; where lo! an altar stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude in its form and fill’d with burning wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapt in the flames a child expiring lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fond father thus was heard to pray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive, O dreadful power, from feeble age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This last pure offering<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> to thy sateless rage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice has thy vengeance on this hated land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claim’d a dear infant from my yielding hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice have those lovely lips the victim prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the mother torn that tender breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the dread duty stifled every sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a tear escaped her beauteous eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fourth and last now meets the fatal doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groan not, my child, thy god remands thee home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend once more, thou dark infernal name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From yon far streaming pyramid of flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatch from his heaving flesh the blasted breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to thee and all the fiends of death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in thy hall, with spoils of nations crown’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confine thy walks beneath the rending ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more on earth the embowel’d flames to pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scourge my people and my race no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Rocha heard; and to the trembling crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn’d the bright image of his beaming god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The afflicted chief with fear and grief opprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the sign and thus the prince addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From what far land, O royal stranger, say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascend thy wandering steps this nightly way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From plains like ours, by holy demons fired?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thy brave people in the flames expired?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hast thou now, to stay the whelming flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No son to offer to the furious god?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From happier lands I came, the prince returns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where no red flaming flood the concave burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No furious god bestorms our soil and skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yield our hands the bloody sacrifice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But life and joy the Power delights to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bids his children but rejoice and live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seest through heaven the day-dispensing Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In living radiance wheel his golden throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er earth’s gay surface send his genial beams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Force from yon cliffs of ice the vernal streams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While fruits and flowers adorn the cultured field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seas and lakes their copious treasures yield:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reigns our only god. In him we trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friend, the father of our happy race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late the lone tribes, on those unlabor’d shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran wild and served imaginary powers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he in pity taught their feuds to cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devised their laws and fashion’d all for peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sacred parents first the reign began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent from his courts to guide the paths of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plant his fruits, to manifest his sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give their blessings where he gives the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sachem proud replied: Thy garb and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaim thy lineage of superior race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our progenitors, no less than thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from a god and own a birth divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that sky-scorching mount, on floods of flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In elder times my great forefathers came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There dwells the sire and from his dark abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft claims as now the tribute of a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This victim due when willing mortals pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His terrors lessen and his fires decay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While purer sleet regales the mountain air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our glad hosts are fired for fiercer war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet know, dread chief, the pious youth rejoin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some one prime Power produced all humankind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sire supreme, whose ever-ruling soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creates, preserves and regulates the whole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sire supreme must roll his radiant eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the wide earth and through the boundless sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all their habitants, their gods and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May rise unveil’d beneath his careful ken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could thy dark fiend, that hides his blind abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cauldrons in his cave that fiery flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield the rich fruits that distant nations find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or praise or punish or behold mankind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when my god, resurging from the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall gild his chambers with the morning light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mystic rites he’ll vindicate his throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And own thy servant for his duteous son.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, the chief replied, thy cares releast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest here the night and share our scanty feast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, driven in hasty rout, our train supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When trembling earth foretold the boiling tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fared, they rested; till with lucid horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All-cheering Phosphor led the lively morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince arose, an altar rear’d in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watcht the splendors of the reddening east.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As o’er the mountain flamed the sun’s broad eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He call’d the host, his holy rites to try;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then took the loaves of maize, the bounties brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to the chief and bade them all partake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hallow’d relics on the pile he placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tufts of flowers the simple offering graced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held to the sun the image from his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose glowing concave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> all the god exprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the dried leaves the rays concentred fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus his voice ascends the listening sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, whose splendors kindle heaven with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great soul of nature, man’s immortal sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If e’er my father found thy sovereign grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thy blest will ordain’d the Incan race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give these lorn tribes to learn thy awful name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive this offering and the pile inflame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall thy laws o’er wider bounds be known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth’s whole race be happy as thy own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus pray’d the prince; the focal flames aspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mute beholders tremble and retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaze on the miracle, full credence own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vow obedience to the sacred Sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The legates now their further course descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young cazique attending as a guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er craggy cliffs pursued their eastern way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trod loftier champaigns, meeting high the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw timorous tribes in these sublime abodes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adore the blasts and turn the storms to gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While every cloud that thunders through the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claims from their hands a human sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile the youth, their better faith to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strives with his usual art, but strives in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain he pleads the mildness of the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gale refutes him ere his speech be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continual tempests from their orient blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And load the mountains with eternal snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun’s own beam, the timid clans declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives all their evils on the tortured air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He draws the vapors up their eastern sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sail and centre round his dazzling eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads the loud storms along his midday course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bids the Andes meet their sweeping force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Builds their bleak summits with an icy throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shine through heaven, a semblance of his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence the sharp sleet, these lifted lawns that wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the scourges that attend their state.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two toilsome days the virtuous Inca strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To social life their savage minds to move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the third morning glow’d serenely bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He led their elders to an eastern height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world unlimited beneath them lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a cloud obscured the rising day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast Amazonia, starr’d with twinkling streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In azure drest, a heaven inverted seems;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim Paraguay extends the aching sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Xaraya glimmers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> like the moon of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land, water, sky in blending borders play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smile and brighten to the lamp of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thus the prince: What majesty divine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What robes of gold! what flames about him shine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There walks the god; his starry sons on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw their dim veil and shrink behind the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth with surrounding nature’s born anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men by millions greet the glorious view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can behold his all delighting soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give life and joy, and heaven and earth control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid death and darkness from his presence move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can behold and not adore and love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those plains, immensely circling, feel his beams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He greens the groves, he silvers gay the streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swells the wild fruitage, gives the beast his food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mute creation hails the genial god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But richer boons his righteous laws impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid the life and mould the social heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arts of peace through happy realms to spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And altars grace with sacrificial bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such our distinguisht lot, who own his sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild as his morning stars and liberal as the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His unknown laws, the mountain chief replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May serve perchance your boasted race to guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yon low plains, that drink his partial ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his glad shrine their just devotions pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we nor fear his frown nor trust his smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain as our prayers is every anxious toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our beasts are buried in his whirls of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our cabins drifted to his slaves below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now his placid looks thy hopes beguile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lures thy raptures with a morning smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon (for so those saffron robes proclaim)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own black tempest shall obstruct his flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storm, thunder, fire against the mountains driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rake deep their sulfur’d sides, disgorging here his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spoke; they waited, till the fervid ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High from the noontide shot the faithless day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lo, far gathering under eastern skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemn and slow, the dark red vapors rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full clouds, convolving on the turbid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move like an ocean to the watery war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The host, securely raised, no dangers harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sit unclouded and o’erlook the storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While far beneath, the sky-borne waters ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veil the dark deep and sheet the mountain’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning’s glancing fires, in fury curl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend their long forky foldings o’er the world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torrents and broken crags and floods of rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From steep to steep roll down their force amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreadful cataracts; the bolts confound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tumbling clouds and rock the solid ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blasts unburden’d take their upward course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the mountain top resume their force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift through the long white ridges from the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rapid whirlwinds lead their terrors forth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High walks the storm, the circling surges rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wild gyrations wheel the hovering skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast hills of snow, in sweeping columns driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deluge the air and choke the void of heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floods burst their bounds, the rocks forget their place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the firm Andes tremble to their base.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long gazed the host; when thus the stubborn chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes on fire, and fill’d with sullen grief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold thy careless god, secure on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughs at our woes and peaceful walks the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives all his evils on these seats sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wafts his favors to a happier clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sire of the dastard race thy words disclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There glads his children, here afflicts his foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence! speed thy flight! pursue him where he leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest vengeance seize thee for thy father’s deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy immolated limbs assuage the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those curst powers, who now a gift require.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The youth in haste collects his scanty train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the sun flies o’er the western plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fading orb with plaintive voice he plies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide his steps and light him down the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when the moon and all the host of even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hang pale and trembling on the verge of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While storms ascending threat their nightly reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seek their absent sire and sink below the main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now to the south he turns; where one vast plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls from a hundred hordes the warrior train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various dress and various form they show’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each wore the ensign of his local god.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From eastern hills a grisly troop descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose war song wild the shuddering concave rends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloak’d in a tiger’s hide their grim chief towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And apes the brinded god his tribe adores.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tusky jaws grin o’er the sachem’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bald eyes glare, the paws depend below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his bored ears contorted serpents hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drops of gore seem’d rolling on his tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northern glens pour forth the Vulture-race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brown tufts of quills their shaded foreheads grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The claws branch wide, the beak expands for blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the armor imitates the god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The condor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> frowning from a southern plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne on a standard, leads a numerous train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clencht in his talons hangs an infant dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long bill pointing where the sachems tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wings though lifeless frighten still the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his broad tail o’ershades the file behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From other plains and other hills afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tribes throng dreadful to the promised war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some twine their forelock with a crested snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wear the emblems of a stream or lake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All from the power they serve assume their mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And foam and yell to taste the Incan blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prince incautious with his men drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Known for an Inca by his dress and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till coop’d and caught amid the warrior trains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bow in silence to the victor’s chains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now the gather’d thousands throng the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And echoing skies the rending shouts retain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zamor, the chieftain of the tiger-band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By choice appointed to the first command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrugg’d up his brinded spoils above the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grimly frowning thus the crowd addrest:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Warriors, attend! tomorrow leads abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our sacred vengeance for our brothers’ blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On those scorcht plains for ever must they lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bones still naked to the burning sky?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left in the field for foreign hawks to tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor our own vultures can the banquet share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon, ye mountain gods, yon dreary west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall sate your hunger with an ampler feast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the proud Sun, that terror of the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall grieve in heaven for all his children slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er his realm our slaughtering armies roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give to your sad powers a happier home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, ye tribes, these men of solar race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Food for the flames, your bloody rites shall grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each to a different god his panting breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resigns in fire; this night demands their death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All but the Inca; him reserved in state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These conquering hands ere long shall immolate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the powers at once that storm the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grateful gift, before his mother’s eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sachem ceased; the chiefs of every race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead the bold captives to their destined place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun descends, the parting day expires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth and heaven display their sparkling fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the raised altars kindle round the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call the victims to their vengeful doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led to their pyres, in sullen pomp they tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sing by turns the triumphs of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the crowd beside his altar stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth devoted to the tiger-god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beauteous form he rose, of noble grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only hope of his illustrious race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His aged sire for numerous years had shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first supporter of the Incan throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise Capac loved the youth and graced his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a fair virgin from a neighboring band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him the legate prince, in equal prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had chose to share his mission round the clime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mounts the pyre, the flames approach his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he wakes the dauntless song of death:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dark vault of heaven, that greet his daily throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where flee the glories of your absent Sun?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye starry hosts, who kindle from his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can you behold him in the western sky?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if unseen beneath his watery bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wearied God reclines his radiant head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When next his morning steps your courts inflame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seek on earth for young Azonto’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then point these ashes, mark the smoky pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say the hero suffer’d with a smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall the Power in vengeance view the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In crimson clothe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> his terror-beaming face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour swift destruction on these curst abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whelm the grim tribes and all their savage gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But ah, forbear to tell my stooping sire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His darling hopes have fed a coward fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should he know the tortures of the brave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why fruitless sorrows bend him to the grave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shalt thou e’er be told, my bridal fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What silent pangs these panting vitals tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But blooming still the patient hours employ</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blind hope of future scenes of joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now haste, ye fiends of death; the sire of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In absent slumber gives your malice way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While fainter light these livid flames supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And short-lived thousands learn of me to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased not speaking; when the yell of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowns all their death songs in a hideous jar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cries rebounding from the hillsides pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wolves and tigers catch the distant roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now more concordant all their voices join,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round the plain they form the festive line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, to the music of the dismal din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indignant Zamor bids the dance begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim through the shadowy fires each changing form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves like a cloud before an evening storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When o’er the moon’s pale face and starry plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shifting shades lead on their broken train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mingling tribes their mazy gambols tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the last groan proclaims the victims dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then part the smoky flesh, enjoy the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lose their labors in oblivious rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon as the western hills announced the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falling fires were scarcely seen to burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grimm’d by the horrors of the dreadful night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hosts woke fiercer for the promised fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dark and silent through the frowning grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The different tribes beneath their standards move.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the solar king collects from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His martial bands to meet the expected war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camps on the confines of an eastern plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That skirts the steep rough limit of his reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trains their ranks, their pliant force combines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To close in columns or extend in lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wheel, change front, in broken files dispart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw new strength from all the warrior’s art.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now the rising sun relumes the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calls to arms the well-accustom’d train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the front imperial Capac strode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fair effulgence like the beaming god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden girdle bound his snowy vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mimic sun hung sparkling on his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lautu’s horned wreath his temples twined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow, the quiver shade his waist behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised high in air his golden sceptre burn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hosts surrounding trembled as he turn’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O’er eastern hills he cast his watchful eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the broad breaks that lengthen down the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whose blue clefts the sloping pathways bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where annual floods from melting snows descend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now dry and deep, they lead from every height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savage files that headlong rush to fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They throng and thicken through the smoky air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every breach pours down the dusky war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when a hundred streams explore their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the same slopes, convolving to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They boil, they bend, they force their floods amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell o’er obstructing crags and sweep the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Capac beholds and waits the coming shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for the billows waits the storm-beat rock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while for fight his ardent troops prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus through the ranks he breathes the soul of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye tribes that flourish in the sun’s mild reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long have your flocks adorn’d the peaceful plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er the realm his smiles persuasive flow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conquer’d all without the stain of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lo, at last that wild infuriate band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With savage war demands your happy land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the dark immeasurable host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending, swarming, how the crags are lost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already now their ravening eyes behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your star-bright temples and your gates of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to their gods in fancied goblets pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warm libation of your children’s gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move then to vengeance, meet the sons of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by this arm and lighted by that god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife is fierce, your fanes and fields the prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior conquers or the infant dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fill’d with his fire, the troops in squared array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait the wild hordes loose huddling to the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pointed arrows, rising on the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look up the sky and chide the lagging foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dread Zamor leads the homicidious train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves from the clefts and stretches o’er the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gives the shriek; the deep convulsing sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hosts reecho, and the hills around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retain the rending tumult; all the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clangs in the conflict of the clashing war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But firm undaunted as a shelvy strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That meets the surge, the bold Peruvians stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steady aim the sounding bowstring ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And showers of arrows thicken through the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When each grim host, in closer conflict join’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clench the dire ax and cast the bow behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through broken ranks sweep wide their slaughtering course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now struggle back, now sidelong sway the force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here from grim chiefs is lopt the grisly head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All gride the dying, all deface the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There scattering o’er the field in thin array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man tugs with man, and clubs with axes play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With broken shafts they follow and they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yells and groans and shouts invade the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round all the shatter’d groves the ground is strow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sever’d limbs and corses bathed in blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long raged the strife; and where, on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A friend, a father or a brother died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No trace remain’d of what he was before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mangled with horrid wounds and black with gore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the Peruvians, in collected might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one wide stroke had wing’d the savage flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their bright godhead, in his midday race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glooms unusual veil’d his radiant face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quencht all his beams, though cloudless, as in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To view from heaven the havoc of the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walking stars, rejoicing at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peep out and gem the anticipated night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day-birds and beasts of light to covert fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And owls and wolves begin their evening cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The astonisht Inca marks, with wild surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead chills on earth, no cloud in all the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His host o’ershaded in the field of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gored by his foes, deserted by his god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute with amaze, they cease the war to wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaze on their leaders and forget their rage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When pious Capac to the listening crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised high his wand and pour’d his voice aloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peruvians hold! Our god forsakes the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor saves his children nor beholds them slain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly! speed your course, regain the guardian town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe in our walls we’ll deprecate his frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seek returning grace, denied us here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste, haste my sons! I guard the flying rear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hero spoke; the trembling tribes obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While deeper glooms obscure the source of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden the savage bands collect amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hang on the rear and sweep them o’er the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shouts, redoubling with the flying war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drown the loud groans and torture all the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawks of heaven, that o’er the field had stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scared by the tumult from the scent of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleave the far gloom; the beasts forget their prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scour the waste and give the war its way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Zamor elate with horrid joy beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun depart, his children fly the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised his rending voice: Thou darkening sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deepen thy damps, the fiend of death is nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold him rising from his shadowy throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To veil this heaven and drive the conquer’d Sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glaring godhead yields to sacred night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his foil’d armies imitate his flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confirm, infernal power, thy rightful reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give deadlier shades and heap the piles of slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the young captive prince shall roll in fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his race accumulate the pyre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye mountain vultures, here your food explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tigers and condors, all ye gods of gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these rich fields, beneath your frowning sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plenteous feast shall every god supply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush forward, warriors, hide the plains with dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas here our friends in former combat bled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strow’d through the waste their naked bones demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This tardy vengeance from our conquering hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said; and high before the tiger-train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With longer strides hangs forward o’er the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bends like a falling tree, to reach the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er tall Capac aims a forceful blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king beheld the ax, and with his wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck the raised weapon from the sachem’s hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then clencht the falling helve, and whirling round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell’d a close file of heroes to the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stay’d, but follow’d where his people run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearing to fight, forsaken by the Sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Cusco’s walls salute their longing sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wide gates receive their rapid flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The folds are barr’d, the foes in shade conceal’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like howling wolves, rave round the frighted field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The monarch now ascends the sacred dome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun’s fixt image there partakes the gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the shrines, where erst on new-moon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell’d the full quires of consecrated praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tomb-like silence reigns; till female cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burst forth at last, and these sad accents rise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it for this, my son to distant lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must trace the wilds and tempt those lawless bands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And does the god obscure his golden throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mournful darkness for my slaughter’d son?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, had his beam, ere that disastrous day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That call’d the youth from these fond arms away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received my spirit to its native sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sad Oella might have seen him die!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where slept thy shaft of vengeance, O my god!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When those fell tigers drank his sacred blood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not the pious prince, with rites divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed the pure flame in this thy hallow’d shrine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And early learn, beneath his father’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shed thy blessings round the favor’d land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Form’d by thy laws the royal seat to grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of thy son and glory of his race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, my lost Rocha, rests thy lovely head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the rent robes thy hapless mother made?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see thee mid those hideous hills of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued and slaughter’d by the wildman foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or doom’d a feast for some pretended god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drench his black altar with celestial blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatch me, O Sun, to happier worlds of light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, shroud me, shroud me with thyself in night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hear’st me not, thou dread departed Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy face is dark and Rocha lives no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus heard the silent king; his equal heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught all her grief and bore a father’s part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause suggested by her tender moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause perchance that veil’d the midday sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouts that spoke the still approaching foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixt him suspense, in all the strength of woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A doubtful moment held his changing choice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now would he sooth her, half assumes his voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But greater cares the rising wish control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call forth all his energy of soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should he cease to ward the coming fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or she be told the foes besiege the gate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turn’d in haste; and now their image-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on the spire with newborn lustre glow’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift through the portal flew the hero’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail’d the growing splendor in the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The troops courageous at return of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throng round the dome, impatient for the fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king descending in the portal stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus addrest the all-delighting god:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O sovereign soul of heaven, thy changing face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes or destroys the glory of thy race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If from this mortal life my child be fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of thy line that ever graced the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy bright splendor ceased on high to burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that loved youth who never must return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive thine armies, when in fields of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lose their strength and fear the frowning god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now thy glory with superior day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows through the field and leads the warrior’s way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May our exalted souls, to vengeance driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn with new brightness in the cause of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy slain son the murderous horde shall bleed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mourn the hero, but avenge the deed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said; and from the battlement on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A watchful warrior raised a sudden cry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“An Inca white on yonder altar tied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis Rocha’s self⁠—the flame ascends his side.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In sweeping haste the bursting gates unbar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flood the champaign with a tide of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud of arrows leads the rapid train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shout, they swarm, they hide the dusty plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bows, quivers, girdles strow the field behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the raised axes cleave the passing wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince, confest to every warrior’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspires each soul and centres all the fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hopes to snatch him from the kindling pyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each fears his breath already flits in fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Zamor ranged his ax-men deep and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wedged like a wall, and thus the king defied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste! son of light, pour fast the winged war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince, the dying prince demands your care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear how his death song chides your dull delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift longer strides, bend forward to the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere flames infolding suffocate his groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child of your beaming god, a victim to our own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, he raised his shaggy shoulders high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the shafts glide thicker through the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the broad billows of the lifted main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls into sight the long Peruvian train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white sail bounding on the billows tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Capac towering o’er the furious host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now meet the dreadful chiefs, with eyes on fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath their blows the parting ranks retire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whirlwind-sweep their meeting axes bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheel, crash in air and plow the trembling ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sinewy limbs in fierce contortions bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mutual strokes with equal force descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parried with equal art, now gyring prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High at the head, now plunging for the breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king starts backward from the struggling foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collects new strength and with a circling blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rusht furious on; his flinty edge, whirl’d wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met Zamor’s helve and glancing grazed his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And settled in his groin; so plunged it lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That scarce the king could tear his ax away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savage fell; when through the tiger-train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The driving Inca turns his force amain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where still compact they hem the murderous pyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rocha’s voice seems faltering to expire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frenzied father rages, thunders wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hews armies down to save the sinking child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks fall staggering where he lifts his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or roll before him like a billowy storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind his steps collecting warriors close;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep centred in a circling ridge of foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cleaves his wasting way; the prince unties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus his voice: Dread sovereign of the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept my living son, again bestow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grace with rites the temple of his god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move, heroes, move; complete the work begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crush the grim race, avenge your injured Sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The savage host, that view’d the daring deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw their nations with their captain bleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised high the shriek of horror; all the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is trod with flight and cover’d with the slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bold Peruvians compass round the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confine their flight and force the rest to yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Capac raised his placid voice again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye conquering troops, collect the vanquisht train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun commands to stay the rage of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows to conquer, but he loves to spare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased; and where the savage leader lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weltering in gore, directs his eager way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwraps the tiger’s hide and strives in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To close the wound and mitigate the pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while compassion for a foe distrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixt with reproach, he thus the chief addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too long, proud prince, thy fearless heart withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our sacred arms and braved the living god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sovereign will commands all feuds to cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His realm is concord and his pleasure peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This copious carnage, spreading far the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insults his bounties, but confirms his reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough; ’tis past; thy parting breath demands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last sad office from my yielding hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share thy pains and feel thy hopeless woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are rites ungrateful to a fallen foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet rest in peace; and know, a chief so brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When life departs, shall find an honor’d grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself in princely pomp thy tomb shall rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tribes unborn thy hapless fate declare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Insult me not with tombs! the monster cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let closing clods thy coward carcase hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these brave bones unburied on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch not with dust nor dare with rites profane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let no curst earth conceal this gory head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor songs proclaim the dreadful Zamor dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, whom the hungry gods from plain to plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have follow’d, feasting on thy slaughter’d train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me wouldst thou cover? no! from yonder sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide-beak hawk, that now beholds me die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon with his cowering train my flesh shall tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wolves and tigers vindicate their share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive, dread Powers (since I can slay no more),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My last glad victim, this devoved gore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus pour’d the vengeful chief his fainting breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lost his utterance in the gasp of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sad remaining tribes confess the power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sheds his bounties round Peruvia’s shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All bow obedient to the Incan throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blest Oella hails her living son.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
