<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Argument</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Vision suspended⁠—Night scene, as contemplated from the mount of vision⁠—Columbus inquires the reason of the slow progress of science, and its frequent interruptions⁠—Hesper answers, that all things in the physical, as well as the moral and intellectual world, are progressive in like manner⁠—He traces their progress from the birth of the universe to the present state of the earth and its inhabitants; asserts the future advancement of society, till perpetual peace shall be established⁠—Columbus proposes his doubts; alleges in support of them the successive rise and downfall of ancient nations; and infers future and periodical convulsions⁠—Hesper, in answer, exhibits the great distinction between the ancient and modern state of the arts and of society⁠—Crusades⁠—Commerce⁠—Hanseatic League⁠—Copernicus⁠—Kepler⁠—Newton⁠—Galileo⁠—Herschel⁠—Descartes⁠—Bacon⁠—Printing press⁠—Magnetic Needle⁠—Geographical discoveries⁠—Federal system in America⁠—A similar system to be extended over the whole earth⁠—Columbus desires a view of this.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>But now had Hesper from the Hero’s sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veil’d the vast world with sudden shades of night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth, sea and heaven, where’er he turns his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arch out immense, like one surrounding sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lampt with reverberant fires. The starry train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paint their fresh forms beneath the placid main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Cynthia here her face reflected laves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright Venus gilds again her natal waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bear redoubling foams with fiery joles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two dire Dragons twine two arctic poles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights o’er the land, from cities lost in shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New constellations, new galaxies spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each high pharos double flames provides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One from its fires, one fainter from the tides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Centred sublime in this bivaulted sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all sides void, unbounded, calm and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft o’er the Pair a lambent lustre plays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their seat still cheering with concentred rays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To converse grave the soothing shades invite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his guide Columbus fixt his sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind messenger of heaven, he thus began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this progressive laboring search of man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If men by slow degrees have power to reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These opening truths that long dim ages teach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, school’d in woes and tortured on to thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passion absorbing what experience taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still through the devious painful paths they wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to sound wisdom lead at last the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why did not bounteous nature at their birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give all their science to these sons of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour on their reasoning powers pellucid day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their arts, their interests clear as light display?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That error, madness and sectarian strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might find no place to havoc human life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the guardian Power: To thee is given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hold high converse and inquire of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark untraversed ages and to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er improves and what impedes thy race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know then, progressive are the paths we go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In worlds above thee, as in thine below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature herself (whose grasp of time and place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deals out duration and impalms all space)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves in progressive march; but where to tend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What course to compass, how the march must end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sons decide not; yet her works we greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperfect in their parts, but in their whole complete.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When erst her hand the crust of Chaos thirl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forced from his black breast the bursting world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High swell’d the huge existence crude and crass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A formless dark impermeated mass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No light nor heat nor cold nor moist nor dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all concocting in their causes lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millions of periods, such as these her spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn since to measure and to call their years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She broods the mass; then into motion brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeks and sorts the principles of things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours in the attractive and repulsive force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirls forth her globes in cosmogyral course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By myriads and by millions, scaled sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scoop their skies and curve the rounds of time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She groups their systems, lots to each his place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strow’d through immensity and drown’d in space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All yet unseen; till light at last begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every system found a centred sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d to his neighbor and exchanged from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His infant gleams with every social star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rays thwarting rays and skies o’erarching skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robed their dim planets with commingling dyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung o’er each heaven their living lamps serene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tinged with blue the frore expanse between:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then joyous Nature hail’d the golden morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank the young beam, beheld her empire born.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo the majestic movement! there they trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their blank infinitudes of time and space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vault with careering curves her central goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour forth her day and stud her evening stole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heedless of count; their numbers still unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmeasured still their progress round her throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none of all her firstborn sons, endow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heavenly sapience and pretensions proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No seraph bright, whose keen considering eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sunbeam speed ascend from sky to sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has yet explored or counted all their spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fixt or found their past record of years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can a ray from her remotest sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot forth when first their splendid morn begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne straight, continuous through the void of space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubling each thousand years its rapid pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hither posting, yet have reacht this earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the tidings of its master’s birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And mark thy native orb! though later born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though still unstored with light her silver horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As seen from sister planets, who repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far more than she their borrow’d streams of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet what an age her shell-rock ribs attest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sparry spines, her coal-encumber’d breast!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millions of generations toil’d and died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crust with coral and to salt her tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And millions more, ere yet her soil began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet she form’d or could have nursed her man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rose the proud phenomenon, the birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most richly wrought, the favorite child of earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But frail at first his frame, with nerves ill strung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unform’d his footsteps, long untoned his tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy, unassociate, unrefined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfledged the pinions of his lofty mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wander’d wild, to every beast a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More prest with wants and feebler far than they;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For countless ages forced from place to place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just reproduced but scarce preserved his race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last, a soil more fixt and streams more sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inform the wretched migrant where to seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euphrates’ flowery banks begin to smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruits fringe the Ganges, gardens grace the Nile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nile, ribb’d with dikes, a length of coast creates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And giant Thebes begins her hundred gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mammoth of human works! her grandeur known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These thousand lustres by its wrecks alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrecks that humiliate still all modern states,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Press the poised earth with their enormous weights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse to quit their place, dissolve their frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trust, like Ilion, to the bards their fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Memphis amass’d her piles, that still o’erclimb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds of heaven and task the tooth of time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belus and Brama tame their vagrant throngs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Homer, with his monumental songs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Builds far more durable his splendid throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the Pharaohs with their hills of stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High roll’d the round of years that hung sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These wondrous beacons in the night of time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studs of renown! that to thine eyes attest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waste of ages that beyond them rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages how fill’d with toils! how gloom’d with woes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trod with all steps that man’s long march compose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim drear disastrous; ere his foot could gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A height so brilliant o’er the bestial train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In those blank periods, where no man can trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleams of thought that first illumed his race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His errors, twined with science, took their birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forged their fetters for this child of earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when, as oft, he dared expand his view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And work with nature on the line she drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some monster, gender’d in his fears, unmann’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His opening soul and marr’d the works he plann’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear, the first passion of his helpless state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redoubles all the woes that round him wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blocks nature’s path and sends him wandering wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a guardian and without a guide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beat by the storm, refresht by gentle rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sunbeams cheer’d or founder’d in the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bows to every force he can’t control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endows them all with intellect and soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With passions various, turbulent and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rewarding virtue and avenging wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives heaven and earth to their supernal doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swells their sway beyond the closing tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence rose his gods, that mystic monstrous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blood-stain’d altars and of priestly power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence blind credulity on all dark things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False morals hence and hence the yoke of kings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yon starry vault that round him rolls the spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gives to earth her seasons, days and years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The source designates and the clue imparts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his errors and of all his arts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There spreads the system that his ardent thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First into emblems, then to spirits wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirits that ruled all matter and all mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourisht or famisht, kill’d or cured mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade him neglect the soil whereon he fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Work with hard hand for that which was not bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erect the temple, darken deep the shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield the full hecatomb with awe divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despise this earth, and claim with lifted eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His health and harvest from the meteor’d skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Accustom’d thus to bow the suppliant head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reverence powers that shake his heart with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pliant faith extends with easy ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heavenly hosts to heaven-anointed men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword, the tripod join their mutual aids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To film his eyes with more impervious shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Create a sceptred idol and enshrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The robber chief in attributes divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arm the new phantom with the nation’s rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail the dreadful delegate of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two settled slaveries thus the race control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engross their labors and debase their soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till creeds and crimes and feuds and fears compose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeds of war and all its kindred woes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unfold, thou Memphian dungeon! there began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lore of Mystery, the mask of man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There fraud with science leagued, in early times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plann’d a resplendent course of holy crimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalkt o’er the nations with gigantic pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sacred symbols charm’d the cheated race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught them new grades of ignorance to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And punish truth with more than mortal pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfold at last thy cope! that man may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mines of mischief he has drawn from thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Wide gapes the porch with hieroglyphics hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mimic zodiacs o’er its arches flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close labyrinth’d here the feign’d Omniscient dwells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dupes from all nations seek the sacred cells;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquiring strangers, with astonisht eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dive deep to read these subterranean skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To taste that holiness which faith bestows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear promulgates through its world of woes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bold Initiate takes his awful stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thin pale taper trembling in his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through hells of howling monsters lies the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To season souls and teach the ways of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Down the crampt corridor, far sunk from day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hands and bended knees he gropes his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims roaring streams, through dens of serpents crawls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descends deep wells and clambers flaming walls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thwart his lane a lake of sulphur gleams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fiery waves and suffocating steams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dares not shun the ford; for full in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce lions rush behind and force him through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long ladders heaved on end, with banded eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mounts, and mounts, and seems to gain the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then backward falling, tranced with deadly fright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds his own feet and stands restored to light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here all dread sights of torture round him rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lasht on a wheel, a whirling felon flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretch, with members chain’d and liver bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhes and disturbs the vulture feasting there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One strains to roll his rock, recoiling still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One, stretcht recumbent o’er a limpid rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns with devouring thirst; his starting eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell’d veins and frothy lips and piercing cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accuse the faithless eddies, as they shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep him panting still, still bending o’er the brink.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last Elysium to his ravisht eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads flowery fields and opens golden skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathes Orphean music through the dancing groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trains the gay troops of beauties, graces, loves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lures his delirious sense with sweet decoys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine fancied foretaste of eternal joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fastidious pomp or proud imperial state⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illusions all, that pass the Ivory Gate!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Various and vast the fraudful drama grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feign’d are the pleasures, as unfelt the woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sainted hierophants, with well taught mimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play’d first the role for all succeeding times;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, vampt and varied as the clime required,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More trist or splendid, open or retired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forms local creeds, with multifarious lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creates the God and bids the world adore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo at the Lama’s feet, as lord of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age following age in dumb devotion fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youthful god, mid suppliant kings enshrined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispensing fate and ruling half mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits with contorted limbs, a silent slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An early victim of a secret grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His priests by myriads famish every clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sell salvation in the tones they chime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>See India’s Triad frame their blood-penn’d codes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Ganges change his gardens for his gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask his own waves from their celestial hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choke his channel with their sainted sands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mad with the mandates of their scriptured word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prompt to snatch from hell her dear dead lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wife, still blooming, decks her sacred urns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts the gay pyre, and with his body burns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shrined in his golden fane the Delphian stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes distant thrones and taxes unknown lands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kings, consuls, khans from earth’s whole regions come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour in their wealth, and then inquire their doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Furious and wild the priestess rends her veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucks through the sacred stool the maddening gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starts, reddens, foams and screams and mutters loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a fell fiend, her oracles of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark enigma, by the pontiff scroll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In broken phrase, and close in parchment roll’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his proud pulpit to the suppliant hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall rive an empire and distract the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And where the mosque’s dim arches bend on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mecca’s dead prophet mounts the mimic sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pilgrims, imbanded strong for mutual aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through dangerous deserts that their faith has made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Train their long caravans, and famisht come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To kiss the shrine and trembling touch the tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fire and sword the same fell faith extend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And howl their homilies to earth’s far end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Phenician altars reek with human gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gods hiss from caverns or in cages roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nile pours from heaven a tutelary flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gardens grow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a> the vegetable god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two rival powers the magian faith inspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Primeval Darkness and immortal Fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil and good in these contending rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each by turns the sovereign of the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun, stars and planets round the earth behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fanes of marble and their shrines of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea, the grove, the harvest and the vine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring from their gods and claim a birth divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While heroes, kings and sages of their times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those gods on earth, are gods in happier climes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minos in judgment sits, and Jove in power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Odin’s friends are feasted there with gore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Man is an infant still; and slow and late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must form and fix his adolescent state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mature his manhood and at last behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His reason ripen and his force unfold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that bright eminence he then shall cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A look of wonder on his wanderings past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Congratulate himself, and o’er the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm the full reign of peace predestined at his birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hesper taught; and farther had pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A theme so grateful as a world renew’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dubious thoughts disturb’d the Hero’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thus with modest mien the Seer addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, friend of man, in this unbounded range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where error vagrates and illusions change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hopes to see his baleful blunders cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth commence that promised age of peace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a loose pendulum his mind is hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wrong to wrong by ponderous passion swung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It vibrates wide, and with unceasing flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps all extremes and scorns the mean of right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in the times you trace he seems to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A steadier movement and a path more plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though experience will have taught him then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark some dangers, some delusions ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet who can tell what future shocks may spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New shades of darkness round his lofty head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunge him again in some broad gulf of woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where long and oft he struggled, wreckt and rose?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What strides he took in those gigantic times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sow’d with cities all his orient climes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When earth’s proud floods he tamed, made many a shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talk’d with heaven from Babel’s glittering tower!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not his Babylon exulting say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sit a queen, for ever stands my sway?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thebes, Memphis, Nineveh, a countless throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught the same splendor and return’d the song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each boasted, promised o’er the world to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spouse of the sun, eternal as the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shall we find them now? the very shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Ninus rear’d his empire is no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dikes decay’d, a putrid marsh regains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunken walls, the tomb-encumber’d plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursues the dwindling nations where they shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skirts with slime its deleterious brink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fox himself has fled his gilded den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor holds the heritage he won from men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lapwing and reptile shun the curst abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the foul dragon, now no more a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trails off his train; the sickly raven flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wide strong-stencht Avernus chokes the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pride and ignorance fall a certain prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the stanch bloodhound of despotic sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then past a long drear night, with here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A doubtful glimmering from a single star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyre, Carthage, Syracuse the gleam increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till dawns at last the effulgent morn of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here all his Muses meet, all arts combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To nerve his genius and his works refine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morals and laws and arms, and every grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That e’er adorn’d or could exalt the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought into science and arranged in rules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell the proud splendor of her cluster’d schools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build and sustain the state with loud acclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And work those deathless miracles of fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stand unrivall’d still; for who shall dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another field with Marathon compare?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who speaks of eloquence or sacred song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But calls on Greece to modulate his tongue?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where has man’s fine form so perfect shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tint or mould, in canvass or in stone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from that splendid height o’erturn’d, once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dasht in dust the living lamp he bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzled with her own glare, decoy’d and sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For homebred faction and barbaric gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greece treads on Greece, subduing and subdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New crimes inventing, all the old renew’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canton o’er canton climbs; till, crusht and broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All yield the sceptre and resume the yoke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where shall we trace him next, the migrant man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try once more his meliorating plan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not the Macedonian, where he strides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Asian worlds and Nile’s neglected tides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepare new seats of glory, to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The transient shadows with perpetual day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heirs erect their empires, and expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beams of Greece through each benighted land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seleucia spreads o’er ten broad realms her sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turns on eastern climes the western ray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Palmyra brightens earth’s commercial zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sits an emblem of her god the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While fond returning to that favorite shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Ammon ruled and Hermes taught of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All arts concentrate, force and grace combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rear and blend the useful with the fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restore the Egyptian glories and retain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where science dawn’d, her great resurgent reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Egypt chased again, he seeks his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More firmly fixt in sage considerate Rome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here all the virtues long resplendent shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that was Greek, barbarian and her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She school’d him sound and boasted to extend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through time’s long course and earth’s remotest end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glorious reign of reason; soon to cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clang of arms and rule the world in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the sense he gain’d and well defined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The various functions of his tutor’d mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could but his sober sense have proved his guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kind experience pruned the shoots of pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A field magnificent before him lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land after land received the spreading ray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Franchise and friendship travell’d in his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bandits of earth and pirates of the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose into citizens, their rage resign’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail’d the great republic of mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever then state slaughter was to pause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man from nature learn to frame his laws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was the moment; here the sunbeam rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hush the human storm and let the world repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But drunk with pomp and sickening at the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stagger’d wild on this delirious height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgot the plainest truths he learnt before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barter’d moral for material power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Calpe’s rock to India’s ardent skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er shuddering earth his talon’d Eagle flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To justice blind and heedless where she drove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when she bore the brandisht bolt of Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rome loads herself with chains, seals fast her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tells the insulted nations when to rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rise they do, tempestuous in their sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarm following swarm, o’ershading land and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll back her outrage and indignant shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s wide vengeance on her sevenfold head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then dwindling back to littleness and shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man soon forgets the gorgeous glare he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinks to a savage serf or monkish drone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roves in rude hordes or counts his beads alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wars with his arts, obliterates his lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burns the books that rear’d his race before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shrouded in deeper darkness now he veers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vast gyration of a thousand years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes out each lamp that would illume his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disputes his food with every beast of prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imbands his force to fence his trist abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretched robber with his feudal codes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length, it seems, some parsimonious rays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collect from each far heaven a feeble blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance o’er his Europe, and again excite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His numerous nations to receive the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But faint and slow the niggard dawn expands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diffused o’er various far dissunder’d lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreading, as well it may, to prove once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same sad chance so often proved before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And why not lapse again? celestial seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive my doubts and ah remove my fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man is my brother; strong I feel the ties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From strong solicitude my doubts arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart, while opening with the boundless scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swells before him and expands his hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forebodes another fall; and though at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy world is planted and with light o’ercast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though two broad continents their beams combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round his whole globe to stream his day divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance some folly yet uncured may spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A storm proportion’d to the lights they shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veil both his continents and leave again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between them stretcht the impermeable main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All science buried, sails and cities lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lands uncultured, as their seas uncrost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till on thy coast, some thousand ages hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New pilots rise, bold enterprise commence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some new Columbus (happier let him be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More wise and great and virtuous far than me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch on the wave and tow’rd the rising day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a strong eaglet steer his untaught way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gird half the globe and to his age unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strange new world, the world we call the old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Finland’s glade to Calpe’s storm-beat head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll find some tribes of scattering wildmen spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one vast wilderness will shade the soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No wreck of art, no sign of ancient toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell where a city stood; nor leave one trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that honors now and all that shames the race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If such the round we run, what hope, my friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see our madness and our miseries end?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here paused the Patriarch: mild the Saint return’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he spoke, fresh glories round him burn’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My son, I blame not but applaud thy grief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquiries deep should lead to slow belief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So small the portion of the range of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His written stories reach or views can span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wild confusion seems to clog his march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dull progress made eludes thy search.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But broad beyond compare, with steadier hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traced o’er his earth, his present paths expand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sober majesty and matron grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sage science now conducts her filial race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if, while all their arts around them shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They culture more the solid than the fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to correct their fatal faults<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, caught by tinsel, they forgot the gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When their strong brilliant imitative lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traced nature only in her gay designs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rear’d the proud column, toned her chanting lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm’d the full senate with her words of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour’d on the canvas every pulse of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the marble rage with human strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These were the arts that nursed unequal sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That priests would pamper and that kings would pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spoke to vulgar sense and often stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sense of right and freedom from the soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, circumscribed in some concentred clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They reacht but one small nation at a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzled that nation, pufft her local pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaim’d her hatred to the world beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew back returning hatred from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sunk themselves beneath the storms of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As, when the sun moves o’er the flaming zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collecting clouds attend his fervid throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Superior splendors, in his morn display’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepare for noontide but a heavier shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus where the brilliant arts alone prevail’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shining course succeeding storms assail’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride, wrong and insult hemm’d their scanty reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Nile their stream, a Hellespont their main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content with Tiber’s narrow shores to wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fledged their Eagle but to fang mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere great inventions found a tardy birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with their new creations blest the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now sober’d man a steadier gait assumes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad is the beam that breaks the Gothic glooms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once consenting nations lift their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hail the holy dawn that streaks the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arabian caliphs rear the spires of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lombards keel their Adriatic main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Charles, invading and reviving all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plants o’er with schools his numerous states of Gaul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Alfred opes the mines whence Albion draws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ore of all her wealth⁠—her liberty and laws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ausonian cities interchange and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lights of learning on the wings of trade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bologna’s student walls arise to fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Germania, thine their rival honors claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halle, Gottinge, Upsal, Kiel and Leyden smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oxonia, Cambridge cheer Britannia’s isle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, like her lark, gay Chaucer leads the lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matin carol of his country’s day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blind War himself, that erst opposed all good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whelm’d meek Science in her votaries’ blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now smooths, by means unseen, her modest way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extends her limits and secures her sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Europe’s world his mad crusaders pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their banded myriads on the Asian shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystic Cross, through famine toil and blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads their long marches to the tomb of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through realms of industry their passage lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And labor’d affluence feasts their curious eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till fields of slaughter whelm the broken host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pride appall’d, their warmest zealots lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise remains to their own shores return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transplant all arts that Hagar’s race adorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn from long intercourse their mutual ties</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find in commerce where their interest lies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Drave’s long course to Biscay’s bending shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Adria sleeps, to where the Bothnian roars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one great Hanse, for earth’s whole trafic known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free cities rise and in their golden zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bind all the interior states; nor princes dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infringe their franchise with voracious war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All shield them safe and joy to share the gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spreads o’er land from each surrounding main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes Indian stuffs, Arabian gums their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plants Persian gems on every Celtic crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours through their opening woodlands milder day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gives to genius his expansive play.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This blessed moment, from the towers of Thorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New splendor rises; there the sage is born!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage who starts these planetary spheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deals out their task to wind their own bright years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restores his station to the parent sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leads his duteous daughters round his throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each mounts obedient on her wheels of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirls round her sisters and salutes the sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guides her new car, her youthful coursers tries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curves careful paths along her alter’d skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learns all her mazes through the host of even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hails and joins the harmony of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>⁠—Fear not, Copernicus! let loose the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch from their goals and mark the moving train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fix at their sun thy calculating eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compare and count their courses round their sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear no disaster from the slanting force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That warps them staggering in elliptic course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sons with steadier ken shall aid the search</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firm and fashion their majestic march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kepler prescribe the laws no stars can shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Newton tie them to the eternal sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His optic tube thy Galileo plies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends new colonies to stock the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives Jove his satellites and first adorns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Effulgent Phosphor with his silver horns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herschel ascends himself<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> with venturous wain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joins and flanks thy planetary train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceives his distance from their elder spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guards with numerous moons the lonely round he steers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, bright Copernicus, thy beams far hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall startle well this intellectual world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break the delusive dreams of ancient lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New floods of light on every subject pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Physic Nature many a winding trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seat the Moral on her sister’s base.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descartes with force gigantic toils alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unshrines old errors and propounds his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a blind Samson, gropes their strong abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whelms deep in dust their temples and their gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buries himself with those false codes they drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes his followers frame and fix the true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bacon with every power of genius fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads over worlds his mantling wings of thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws in firm lines and tells in nervous tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that is yet and all that shall be known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withes Proteus Matter in his arms of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drags her tortuous secrets forth to light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids men their unproved systems all forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Informs them what to learn, and how to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves the first flambeau through the night that veils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Egyptian fables and Phenician tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strips from all plundering Greece the cloak she wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shows the blunders of her borrow’d lore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One vast creation, lately borne abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheers the young nations like a nurturing god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathes through them all the same wide searching soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forms, feeds, refines and animates the whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guards every ground they gain and forward brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad science soaring on cerulean wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instructs all men her golden gifts to prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catch new glories from her beamful eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the prolific Press; whose tablet, fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By graphic Genius with his painted thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flings forth by millions the prodigious birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a moment stocks the astonisht earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Genius, enamor’d of his fruitful bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assumes new force and elevates his pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, recumbent o’er his finger’d style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plods whole years each copy to compile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves to ludibrious winds the priceless page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to chance fires the treasure of an age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bold and buoyant, with his sister Fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strides o’er earth, holds high his ardent flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls up Discovery with her tube and scroll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And points the trembling magnet to the pole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence the brave Lusitanians stretch the sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorn guiding stars and tame the midsea gale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hence thy prow deprest the boreal wain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rear’d adverse heavens, a second earth to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran down old Night, her western curtain thirl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snatcht from swaddling shades an infant world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rome, Athens, Memphis, Tyre! had you but known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This glorious triad, now familiar grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Press, the Magnet faithful to its pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth’s own movement round her steadfast goal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er had your science, from that splendid height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunk in her strength nor seen succeeding night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her own utility had forced her sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nations caught the fast extending ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature through all her kingdoms oped the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resign’d her secrets and her wealth bestow’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her moral codes a like dominion rear’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom been born and folly disappear’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War and his monsters sunk beneath her ban</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left the world to reason and to man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now behold him bend his broader way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift keener eyes and drink diviner day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All systems scrutinize, their truths unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prove well the recent, well revise the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reject all mystery, and define with force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The point he aims at in his laboring course⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know these elements, learn how they wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wondrous webs of matter and of mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What springs, what guides organic life requires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move, rule, rein its ever-changing gyres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Improve and utilise each opening birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aid the labors of this nurturing earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But chief their moral soul he learns to trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stronger chain which links and leads the race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which forms and sanctions every social tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blinds or clears their intellectual eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strips that soul from every filmy shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That schools had caught, that oracles had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relumes her visual nerve, develops strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rules of right, the subtle shifts of wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of civil power draws clear the sacred line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives to just government its right divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forms, varies, fashions, as his lights increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till earth is fill’d with happiness and peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Already taught, thou know’st the fame that waits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rising seat in thy confederate states:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stands the model, thence he long shall draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forms of policy, his traits of law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each land shall imitate, each nation join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-based brotherhood, the league divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extend its empire with the circling sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And band the peopled globe beneath its federal zone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spoke, returning tears of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffused the Hero’s cheek and pearl’d his eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unveil, said he, my friend, and stretch once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath my view that heaven-illumined shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me behold her silver beams expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead all nations, lighten every land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instruct the total race and teach at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their toils to lessen and their chains to cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trace and attain the purpose of their birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold in peace this heritage of earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Seraph smiled consent; the Hero’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watcht for the daybeam round the changing sky.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
