<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Argument</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The vision resumed and extended over the whole earth⁠—Present character of different nations⁠—Future progress of society with respect to commerce; discoveries; inland navigation; philosophical, medical and political knowledge⁠—Science of government⁠—Assimilation and final union of all languages⁠—Its effect on education and on the advancement of physical and moral science⁠—The physical precedes the moral, as Phosphor precedes the Sun⁠—View of a general Congress from all nations, assembled to establish the political harmony of mankind⁠—Conclusion.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Hesper again his heavenly power display’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook the yielding canopy of shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden the stars their trembling fires withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning splendors burst upon the view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floods of unfolding light the skies adorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more than midday glories grace the morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shone the earth, as if the sideral train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad as full suns, had sail’d the ethereal plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When no distinguisht orb could strike the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one clear blaze of all surrounding light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erflow’d the vault of heaven. For now in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remoter climes and future ages drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose deeds of happier fame, in long array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d into vision, fill the newborn day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far as seraphic power could lift the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or earth or ocean bend the yielding sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or circling suns awake the breathing gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drake lead the way, or Cook extend the sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Behren sever’d, with adventurous prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hesperia’s headland from Tartaria’s brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sage Vancouvre’s patient leads were hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Deimen stretcht his solitary world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All lands, all seas that boast a present name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that unborn time shall give to fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the Pair in bright expansion rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth in one vast level bounds the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They saw the nations tread their different shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ply their own toils and wield their local powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their present state in all its views disclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their gleams of happiness, their shades of woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plodding in various stages through the range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man’s unheeded but unceasing change.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columbus traced them with experienced eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And class’d and counted all the flags that fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He markt what tribes still rove the savage waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What cultured realms the sweets of plenty taste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where arts and virtues fix their golden reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or peace adorns or slaughter dyes the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw the restless Tartar proud to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move with his herds and pitch a transient home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tibet’s long tracts and China’s fixt domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull as their despots, yield their cultured grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cambodia, Siam, Asia’s myriad isles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old Indostan, with their wealthy spoils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attract adventures masters, and o’ershade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sunbright ocean with the wings of trade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arabian robbers, Syrian Kurds combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Create their deserts and infest mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Turk’s dim crescent, like a day-struck star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Russia’s eagle shades their haunts of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrinks from insulted Europe, who divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shatter’d empire to the Pontic tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He traced impervious Afric, where alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lies encircled with the verdant zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lines her endless coast and still sustains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her northern pirates and her eastern swains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourns her interior tribes purloin’d away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chain’d and sold beyond Atlantic day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brazilla’s wilds, Mackensie’s savage lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bickering strife inflame their furious bands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atlantic isles and Europe’s cultured shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap their vast wealth, exchange their growing stores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All arts inculcate, new discoveries plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tease and torment but school the race of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his own federal states, extending far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm their brave sons now breathing from the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfold their harbors, spread their genial soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And welcome freemen to the cheerful toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A sight so solemn, as it varied round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d his fond heart with reveries profound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt the infinitude of thoughts that pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guide and govern that enormous mass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cares that agitate, the creeds that blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woes that waste the many-master’d kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The distance great that still remains to trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere sober sense can harmonize the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held him suspense, imprest with reverence meek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choked his utterance as he wish’d to speak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Hesper thus: The paths they here pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide as they seem unfolding to thy view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show but a point in that long circling course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which cures their weakness and confirms their force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lends that experience which alone can close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scenes of strife and give the world repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet here thou seest the same progressive plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That draws for mutual succour man to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From twain to tribe, from tribe to realm dilates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In federal union groups a hundred states,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all their turns with gradual scale ascends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their powers, their passions and their interest blends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While growing arts their social virtues spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enlarge their compacts and unlock their trade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till each remotest clan, by commerce join’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Links in the chain that binds all humankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bloody banners sink in darkness furl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one white flag of peace triumphant walks the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As infant streams, from oozing earth at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feeble force and lonely murmurs burst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From myriad unseen fountains draw the rills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And curl contentious round their hundred hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet, froth and foam, their dashing currents swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er crags and rocks their furious course impel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impetuous plunging plow the mounds of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tear the fostering flanks that gave them birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mad with the strength they gain, they thicken deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their muddy waves and slow and sullen creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erspread whole regions in their lawless pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stagnate long, then shrink and curb their tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon more tranquil grown, with steadier sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through broader banks they shape their seaward way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From different climes converging, join and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mingled waters in one widening bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profound, transparent; till the liquid zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bands half the globe and drinks the golden sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps onward still the still expanding plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moves majestic to the boundless main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis thus Society’s small sources rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through passions wild her infant progress lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear, with its host of follies, errors, woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creates her obstacles and forms her foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misguided interest, local pride withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till long-tried ills her growing views expand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till tribes and states and empires find their place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mutual wants her widest walks embrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enlighten’d interest, moral sense at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Combine their aids to elevate her strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead o’er the world her peace-commanding sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light her steps with everlasting day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From that markt stage of man we now behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More rapid strides his coming paths unfold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His continents are traced, his islands found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well taught sails on all his billows bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His varying wants their new discoveries ply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seek in earth’s whole range their sure supply.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First of his future stages, thou shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His trade unfetter’d and his ocean free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy young states the code consoling springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strip from vulture War his naval wings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In views so just all Europe’s powers combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth’s full voice approves the vast design.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though still her inland realms the combat wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold in lingering broils the unsettled age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet no rude shocks that shake the crimson plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall more disturb the labors of the main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The main that spread so wide his travell’d way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liberal as air, impartial as the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all thy race the common wealth might share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exchange their fruits and fill their treasures there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their speech assimilate, their counsels blend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till mutual interest fix the mutual friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now see, my son, the destined hour advance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe in their leagues commercial navies dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave their curst cannon on the quay-built strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like the stars of heaven a fearless course command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Hero lookt; beneath his wondering eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay streamers lengthen round the seas and skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The countless nations open all their stores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Load every wave and crowd the lively shores;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright sails in mingling mazes streak the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And commerce triumphs o’er the rage of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Baltic streams, from Elba’s opening side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Rhine’s long course and Texel’s laboring tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Gaul, from Albion, tired of fruitless fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From green Hibernia, clothed in recent light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hispania’s strand that two broad oceans lave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Senegal and Gambia’s golden wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tago the rich and Douro’s viny shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet Canaries and the soft Azores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commingling barks their mutual banners hail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink by turns the same distending gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Calpe’s strait that leads the Midland main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Adria, Pontus, Nile’s resurgent reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sails look forth and wave their bandrols high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask their breezes from a broader sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Asia’s isles and utmost shorelands bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like rising suns the sheeted masts ascend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coast after coast their flowing flags unrol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Deimen’s rocks to Zembla’s ice-propt pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Behren’s pass collapsing worlds divides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where California breaks the billowy tides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peruvian streams their golden margins boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Chile bluffs or Plata flats the coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, clothed in splendor, his Atlantic way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads the blue borders of Hesperian day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all his havens, with majestic sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swiftest boldest daughters of the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarm forth before him; till the cloudlike train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From pole to pole o’ersheet the whitening main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So some primeval seraph, placed on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven’s sublimest point o’erlookt the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When space unfolding heard the voice of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suns and stars and systems roll’d abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught their first splendors from his beamful eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began their years and vaulted round their sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their social spheres in bright confusion play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exchange their beams and fill the newborn day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor seas alone the countless barks behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s inland realms their naval paths unfold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her plains, long portless, now no more complain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of useless rills and fountains nursed in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canals curve through them many a liquid line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prune their wild streams, their lakes and oceans join.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Darien hills o’erlook the gulfy tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleft in his view the enormous banks divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascending sails their opening pass pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waft the sparkling treasures of Peru.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moxoe resigns his stagnant world of fen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allures, rewards the cheerful toils of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads their long new made rivers round his reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives off the stench and waves his golden grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeds a whole nation from his cultured shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where not a bird could skim the skies before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Mohawk’s mouth, far westing with the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long bright canals through all the midlands run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tap the redundant lakes, the broad hills brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hudson marry with Missouri’s wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From dim Superior, whose uncounted sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shade his full seas and bosom all his gales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New paths unfolding seek Mackensie’s tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And towns and empires rise along their side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slave’s crystal highways all his north adorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like coruscations from the boreal morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud Missisippi, tamed and taught his road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flings forth irriguous from his generous flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten thousand watery glades; that, round him curl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vein the broad bosom of the western world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the red banks of Arab’s odorous tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their Isthmus opens and strange waters glide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Europe from all her shores with crowded sails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks through the pass and calls the Asian gales.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Volga and Obi distant oceans join,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted Danube weds the wasting Rhine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elbe, Oder, Neister channel many a plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exchange their barks and try each other’s main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All infant streams and every mountain rill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose their new paths, some useful task to fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each acre irrigate, re-road the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And serve at last the purpose of their birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Earth, garden’d all, a tenfold burden brings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fruits, her odors, her salubrious springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell, breathe and bubble from the soil they grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>String with strong nerves the renovating race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their numbers multiply in every land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their toils diminish and their powers expand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while she rears them with a statelier frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their soul she kindles with diviner flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads their bright intellect with fervid glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the mass of things that still remain to know.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw the aspiring genius of the age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soar in the Bard and strengthen in the Sage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bard with bolder hand assumes the lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warms the glad nations with unwonted fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attunes to virtue all the tones that roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tides of transport through the expanding soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him no more, beneath their furious gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old ocean crimsons and Olympus nods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uprooted mountains sweep the dark profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Titans groan beneath the rending ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more his clangor maddens up the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crush, to conquer and enslave mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build on ruin’d realms the shrines of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And load his numbers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> with a tyrant’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far nobler objects animate his tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give new energies to epic song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To moral charms he bids the world attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fraternal states their mutual ties extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er cultured earth the rage of conquest cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War sink in night and nature smile in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soaring with science then he learns to string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her highest harp, and brace her broadest wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own force to fray the paths untrod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own glance to ken the total God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through heavens o’ercanopied by heavens behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New suns ascend and other skies unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Social and system’d worlds around him shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lift his living strains to harmony divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sage with steadier lights directs his ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through twofold nature leads the walks of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remolds her moral and material frames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mutual aids, their sister laws proclaims.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disease before him with its causes flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boasts no more of sickly soils and skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well proved codes the healing science aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its base establish and its blessing spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With long wrought life to teach the race to glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vigorous nerves to grace the locks of snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From every shape that varying matter gives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rests or ripens, vegetates or lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His chymic powers new combinations plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield new creations, finer forms to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High springs of health for mind and body trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Add force and beauty to the joyous race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arm with new engines his adventurous hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch o’er these elements his wide command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay the proud storm submissive at his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change, temper, tame all subterranean heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Probe laboring earth, and drag from her dark side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young Volcano, ere its force be tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walk under ocean, ride the buoyant air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brew the soft shower, the labor’d land repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fruitful soil o’er sandy deserts spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clothe with culture every mountain’s head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where system’d realms their mutual glories lend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well-taught sires the cares of state attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through every maze of man they learn to wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Note each device that prompts the Proteus mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What soft restraints the tempered breast requires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To taste new joys and cherish new desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expand the selfish to the social flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear the soul to deeds of nobler fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mark, in all the past records of praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What partial views heroic zeal could raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What mighty states on others’ ruins stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And built unsafe their haughty seats in blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How public virtue’s ever borrow’d name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With proud applauses graced the deeds of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade each imperial standard wave sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wild ambition havoc every clime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From chief to chief the kindling spirit ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heirs of false fame and enemies of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where Grecian states in even balance hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warm’d with jealous fires the patriot’s tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exclusive ardor cherisht in the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love to one land and hatred to the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the flames of civil discord rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Roman arms with Roman arms engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mime of virtue rises still the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build a Cesar’s as a Pompey’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now no more the patriotic mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To narrow views and local laws confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gainst neighboring lands directs the public rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plods for a clan or counsels for an age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soars to loftier thoughts, and reaches far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the power, beyond the wish of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For realms and ages forms the general aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes patriot views and moral views the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works with enlighten’d zeal, to see combined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strength and happiness of humankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long had Columbus with delighted eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Markt all the changes that around him rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived through descending ages as they roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feasted still the still expanding soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now the peopled regions swell more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a mixt noise tumultuous stuns his ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first, like heavy thunders roll’d in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the rude shock of cannonading war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or waves resounding on the craggy shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoarse roll’d the loud-toned undulating roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon the sounds like human voices rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nations pouring undistinguisht cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till more distinct the wide concussion grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls forth at times an accent like his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By turns the tongues assimilating blend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smoother idioms over earth ascend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingling and softening still in every gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er discord’s din, harmonious tones prevail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last a simple universal sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winds through the welkin, sooths the world around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From echoing shores in swelling strain replies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moves melodious o’er the warbling skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such wild commotions as he heard and view’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fixt astonishment the Hero stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus besought the Guide: Celestial friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What good to man can these dread scenes intend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sore distress attends that boding sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That breathed its hoarse tonations o’er the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War sure hath ceased; or have my erring eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misread the glorious visions of the skies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell then, my Seer, if future earthquakes sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed in the conscious caverns of the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting the day of vengeance, when to roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rock the rending pillars of the pole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or tell if aught more dreadful to my race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these dark signs thy heavenly wisdom trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And why the loud discordance melts again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the smooth glidings of a tuneful strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The guardian god replied: Thy fears give o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War’s hosted hounds shall havoc earth no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sore distress these signal sounds foredoom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But give the pledge of peaceful years to come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tongues of nations here their accents blend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till one pure language through the world extend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou know’st the tale of Babel; how the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear’d for their safety as they felt him rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent unknown jargons mid the laboring bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confused their converse and unnerved their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispersed the bickering tribes and drove them far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From peaceful toil to violence and war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade kings arise with bloody flags unfurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade pride and conquest wander o’er the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught adverse creeds, commutual hatreds bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till holy homicide the climes o’erspread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>⁠—For that fine apologue, with mystic strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave like the rest a golden age<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascribed perfection to his infant state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Science unsought and all his arts innate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supposed the experience of the growing race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must lead him retrograde and cramp his pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obscure his vision as his lights increast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sink him from an angel to a beast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis thus the teachers of despotic sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strive in all times to blot the beams of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep him curb’d nor let him lift his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see where happiness, where misery lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lead him blind, and o’er each newborn light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast their own shadows, renovate the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crush every art that might the mind expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plant with demons every desert land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, fixt in straiten’d bounds, the lust of power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May ravage still and still the race devour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An easy prey the hoodwinkt hordes remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oceans roll and shores extend in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long have they reign’d; till now the race at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shake off their manacles, their blinders cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’errule the crimes their fraudful foes produce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ways unseen to serve the happiest use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempt the wide wave, probe every yielding soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill with their fruits the hardy hand of toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unite their forces, wheel the conquering car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deal mutual death, but civilize by war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear bought the experiment and hard the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of social man, that rear’d his arts to life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His passions wild that agitate the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His reason calm, their watchful guide design’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet unreconciled, his march restrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mislead the judgment and betray the man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear, his first passion, long maintain’d the sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long shrouded in its glooms the mental ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook, curb’d, controll’d his intellectual force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore him wild through many a devious course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long had his Reason, with experienced eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perused the book of earth and scaled the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led fancy, memory, foresight in her train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er creation stretcht her vast domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would that rival Fear her strength appal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that one conflict always sure to fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild Reason shunn’d the foe she could not brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renounced her empire and remained a slave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But deathless, though debased, she still could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some beams of truth to pour upon the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though she dared no moral code to scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through physic forms she learnt to lead the man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strengthen thus his opening orbs of sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nerve and clear them for a stronger light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stronger light, from nature’s double codes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now springs expanding and his doubts explodes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nations catch it, all their tongues combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hail the human morn and speak the day divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At this blest period, when the total race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall speak one language and all truths embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instruction clear a speedier course shall find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And open earlier on the infant mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No foreign terms shall crowd with barbarous rules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dull unmeaning pageantry of schools;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dark authorities nor names unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill the learn’d head with ignorance not its own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wisdom’s eye with beams unclouded shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And simplest rules her native charms define;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One living language, one unborrow’d dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her boldest flights with fullest force express;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Triumphant virtue, in the garb of truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win a pure passage to the heart of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pervade all climes where suns or oceans roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warm the world with one great moral soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see, facilitate, attain the scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all their labor and of all their hope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As early Phosphor, on his silver throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair type of truth and promise of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiles up the orient in his dew-dipt ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illumes the front of heaven and leads the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Physic Science with exploring eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First o’er the nations bids her beauties rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepares the glorious way to pour abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Sister’s brighter beams, the purest light of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Moral Science leads the lively mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through broader fields and pleasures more refined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaches the temper’d soul, at one vast view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glance o’er time and look existence through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See worlds and worlds, to being’s formless end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their hosts on her prime power depend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seraphs and suns and systems, as they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live in her life and kindle from her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her cloudless ken, her all pervading soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illume, sublime and harmonize the whole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaches the pride of man its breadth to bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one small point of this amazing round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shrink and rest where nature fixt its fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A line its space, a moment for its date;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instructs the heart an ampler joy to taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And share its feelings with each human breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expand its wish to grasp the total kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sentient soul, of cogitative mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till mutual love commands all strife to cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth join joyous in the songs of peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus heard Columbus, eager to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The famed Apocalypse its years unfold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul stood speaking through his gazing eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus his voice: Oh let the visions rise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command, celestial guide, from each far pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John’s vision’d morn to open on my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raise the scenes, by his reflected light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living and glorious to my longing sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let heaven unfolding show the eternal throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the concave flame in one clear sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On clouds of fire, with angels at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prince of Peace, the King of Salem ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With smiles of love to greet the bridal earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call slumbering ages to a second birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his white-robed millions fill the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here commence the interminable reign!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such views, the Saint replies, for sense too bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would seal thy vision in eternal night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man cannot face nor seraph power display</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystic beams of such an awful day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough for thee, that thy delighted mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should trace the temporal actions of thy kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That time’s descending veil should ope so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the reach of wretchedness and war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all the paths in nature’s sapient plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair in thy presence lead the steps of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form at last, on earth’s extended ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Union of parts and happiness of all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy glad ken these rolling years have shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boundless blessings thy vast labors crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with the joys of unborn ages blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul exulting may retire to rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But see once more! beneath a change of skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last glad visions wait thy raptured eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eager he lookt. Another train of years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had roll’d unseen, and brighten’d still their spheres;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth more resplendent in the floods of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assumed new smiles and flusht around him lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green swell the mountains, calm the oceans roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh beams of beauty kindle round the pole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the range where shores and seas extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tenfold pomp the works of peace ascend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robed in the bloom of spring’s eternal year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ripe with fruits the same glad fields appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er hills and vales perennial gardens run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cities unwall’d stand sparkling to the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streams all freighted from the bounteous plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swell with the load and labor to the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose stormless waves command a steadier gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prop the pinions of a bolder sail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sway’d with the floating weight each ocean toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joyous nature’s full perfection smiles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fill’d with unfolding fate, the vision’d age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now leads its actors on a broader stage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When clothed majestic in the robes of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved by one voice, in general congress meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The legates of all empires. ’Twas the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where man first sought to socialize his race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet beguiled, the dark delirious hordes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to fight for altars and for lords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nile washes still the soil and feels once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The works of wisdom press his peopled shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this mid site, this monumental clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rear’d by all realms to brave the wrecks of time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spacious dome swells up, commodious great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last resort, the unchanging scene of state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rocks of adamant the walls ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall columns heave and sky-like arches bend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright o’er the golden roofs the glittering spires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the concave meet the solar fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four blazing fronts, with gates unfolding high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look with immortal splendor round the sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither the delegated sires ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the cares of every clime attend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As the blest guardian guides, to whom was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light the suns and steer the stars of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When one great cosmogyre has proved their spheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And time well taught them how to wind their years)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall meet in general council; call’d to state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laws and labors that their charge await;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn, to teach, to settle how to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their course more glorious, as their lights unfold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the bounds of space (the mandate known)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wing their passage to the eternal throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each through his far dim sky illumes the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sails and centres tow’rd the mount of God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, in mid universe, their seats to rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exchange their counsels and their works compare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, from all tracts of earth, this gathering throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ships and chariots shape their course along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach with unwonted speed the place assign’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear and give the counsels of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>South of the sacred mansion, first resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembled sires, and pass the spacious court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in his porch earth’s figured Genius stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth’s mighty mirror poizing in his hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graved on the pedestal and chased in gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s noblest arts their symbol forms unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tillage and his trade; with all the store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wondrous fabrics and of useful lore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labors that fashion to his sovereign sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s total powers, her soil and air and sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Force them to yield their fruits at his known call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear his mandates round the rolling ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the footstool all destructive things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mask of priesthood and the mace of kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie trampled in the dust; for here at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fraud, folly, error all their emblems cast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each envoy here unloads his wearied hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some old idol from his native land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One flings a pagod on the mingled heap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One lays a crescent, one a cross to sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swords, sceptres, mitres, crowns and globes and stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Codes of false fame and stimulants to wars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink in the settling mass; since guile began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the agents of the woes of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the full concourse, where the arches bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour through by thousands and their seats ascend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far as the centred eye can range around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the deep trumpet’s solemn voice resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long rows of reverend sires sublime extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cares of worlds on every brow suspend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the front, for soundest wisdom known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sire elect in peerless grandeur shone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He open’d calm the universal cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give each realm its limit and its laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid the last breath of tired contention cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bind all regions in the leagues of peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till one confederate, condependent sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread with the sun and bound the walks of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One centred system, one all-ruling soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live through the parts and regulate the whole.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here then, said Hesper, with a blissful smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold the fruits of thy long years of toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To yon bright borders of Atlantic day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy swelling pinions led the trackless way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught mankind such useful deeds to dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To trace new seas and happy nations rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till by fraternal hands their sails unfurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have waved at last in union o’er the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then let thy steadfast soul no more complain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dangers braved and griefs endured in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of courts insidious, envy’s poison’d stings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loss of empire and the frown of kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While these broad views thy better thoughts compose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spurn the malice of insulting foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the joys descending ages gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repay thy labors and remove thy pain.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
