<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Argument</p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Vision confined to North America⁠—Progress of the colonies⁠—Troubles with the natives⁠—Settlement of Canada⁠—Spirit of the English and French colonies compared⁠—Hostilities between France and England extended to America⁠—Braddock’s defeat⁠—Washington saves the relics of the English army⁠—Actions of Abercrombie, Amherst, Wolfe⁠—Peace⁠—Darkness overspreads the continent⁠—Apprehensions of Columbus from that appearance⁠—Cause explained⁠—Cloud bursts away in the centre⁠—View of congress and of the different regions from which its members are delegated⁠—Their endeavors to arrest the violence of England compared with those of the Genius of Rome to dissuade Cesar from passing the Rubicon⁠—The demon War stalking over the ocean and leading on the English invasion⁠—Conflagration of towns from Falmouth to Norfolk⁠—Battle of Bunker Hill seen through the smoke⁠—Death of Warren⁠—American army assembles⁠—Review of its chiefs⁠—Speech of Washington⁠—Actions and death of Montgomery⁠—Loss of New York.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus hail’d them with a father’s smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruits of his cares and children of his toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While still his eyes through tears of joy descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their course adventurous on the distant tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus when o’er deluged earth her Numen stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tost ark bounding on the shoreless flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred treasure fixt his guardian view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While climes unnoticed in the wave withdrew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hero saw them reach the rising strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leap from their ships and share the joyous land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receding forests yield the laborers room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opening wilds with fields and gardens bloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d with the glance ecstatic, all his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now seems unbounded with the scene to roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now impatient, with retorted eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceives his station in another sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waft me, indulgent Angel, waft me o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those blest heroes to the happy shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There let me live and die. But all appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fleeting vision! these are future years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet grant the illusion still may nearer spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my glad steps may seem their walks to tread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Europe wrapt in momentary night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall rise no more to intercept the sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus thus; when Hesper’s potent hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves brightening o’er the visionary land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The height that bore them still sublimer grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth’s whole circuit settled from their view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dusky deep serene as breathless even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d vaulting downward like another heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun, rejoicing on his western way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stampt his fair image in the inverted day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now Hesperia’s coast arose more nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life and action fill’d the dancing eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Between the gulfs, where Lawrence drains the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where Floridia’s farthest floods are curl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where midlands broad their swelling mountains heave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slope their champaigns to the Atlantic wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sandy streambank and the woodgreen plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raise into sight the new made seats of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The placid ports that break the seaborn gales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rear their tall masts and stretch aloft their sails;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full harvests wave, the groves with fruitage bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay villas smile, defensive towers ascend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the rich works of art their charms display</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To court the planter and his cares repay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till war invades; when soon the dales disclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their meadows path’d with files of savage foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High tufted quills their painted foreheads press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark spoils of beasts their shaggy shoulders dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow bent forward for the combat strung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ax, the quiver on the girdle hung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep discordant yells convulse the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth resounds the war whoop’s hideous blare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The patriarch lookt; and every darken’d height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours down the swarthy nations to the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Kennebec’s high source forsakes the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where long Champlain’s yet unkeel’d waters lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Hudson crowds his hill-dissundering tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Kaatskill heights the starry vault divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the dim Alleganies range sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give their streams to every neighboring clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swarms descended like an evening shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wolves and vultures follow’d where they spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus when a storm on eastern pinions driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets the firm Andes in the midst of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds convulse, the torrents pour amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black waters sweep the subject plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through harvest fields the bloody myriads tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sack the lone village, strow the streets with dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames in spiry volumes round them rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrieks and shouts redoubling rend the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair babes and matrons in their domes expire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or bursting frantic through the folding fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They scream, fly, fall; promiscuous rave along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yelling victors and the driven throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streams run purple; all the peopled shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wrapt in flames and trod with steps of gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till colons, gathering from the shorelands far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch their new standards and oppose the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With muskets match the many-shafted bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loud artillery stun the astonisht foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When like a broken wave the barbarous train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead back the flight and scatter from the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay their weak captives, drop their shafts in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget their spoils and scour the trackless waste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wood to wood in wild confusion hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hurry o’er the hills far through the savage world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now move secure the cheerful works of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New temples rise and fruitful fields increase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Delaware’s wide waves behold with pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penn’s beauteous town ascending on their side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crossing streets in just alignment run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walls and pavements sparkle to the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that famed city rose the checker’d plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose spacious towers Semiramis began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long ages finisht what her hand design’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pride of kings and wonder of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>New York ascends o’er Hudson’s seaward isles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flings the sunbeams from her glittering tiles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albania, opening through the distant wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls her rich treasures on her parent flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a thousand sails young Boston laves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High looms majestic Newport o’er the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patapsco’s bay contracts his yielding side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As spreading Baltimore invades his tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspiring Richmond tops the bank of James,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Charleston sways her two contending streams.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through each colonial realm, for wisdom great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elected sires assume the cares of state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed in equality, to freedom bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm is their step and straight the paths they tread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispensing justice with paternal hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By laws of peace they rule the happy land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While reason’s page their statute codes unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rights and charters flame in figured gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rights that Britons know they here transfuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sense invigorate and expand their views,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dare every height of human soul to scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find, fathom, scope the moral breadth of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn how his social powers may still dilate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tone their tension to a stronger state.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gaul’s migrant sons explore the western day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch over Canada their colon sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plant sylvan Wabash with a watchful post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Mississippi spread a mantling host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid Louisiana’s lovely clime prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New arts to prove and infant states to rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the bright lakes, that wide behind them spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfold their channels to the paths of trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ohio’s waves their destined honors claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smile, as conscious of approaching fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Gallic planters still their trammels wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feudal genius still attends them here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dependent feelings for a distant throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gyve the crampt soul that fears to think alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demand their rulers from the parent land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laws ready made and generals to command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judge, priest and pedagogue and all the slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of foreign masters crowding o’er the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread thick the shades of vassalage and sloth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absorb their labors and prevent their growth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Damp every thought that might their tyrants brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep the vast domain a desert and a grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too soon the mother states with jealous fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transport their feuds and homebred quarrels here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Gallia’s war-built barks ascend in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White flags unfold and armies robed in white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all the frontier streams their forts prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And coop our cantons with surrounding war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quebec, as proud she rears her rocky seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeds their full camp and shades their anchored fleet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oswego’s rampart frowns athwart his flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wild Ontario swells beneath his load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now an equal host from Albion’s strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrives to aid her young colonial band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They join their force and tow’rd the falling day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impetuous Braddock leads their hasty way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Allegany heights, like streams of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red flags wave and glittering arms aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the savage hordes, who there advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their skulking files to join the arms of France.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where, old as earth, yet still unstain’d with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monongahela roll’d his careless flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flankt with his mantling groves the fountful hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drain’d the vast region through his thousand rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lured o’er his lawns the buffle herds, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all his fowls his piscatory glade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now perceives, with hostile flag unfurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Gallic fortress awe the western world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Braddock bends his march; the troops within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold their danger and the fire begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth bursting from the gates they rush amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Front, flank and charge the fast approaching train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The batteries blaze, the leaden volleys pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vales, the streams, the solid mountains roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clouds of convolving smoke the welkin spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The champaign shrouding in sulphureous shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in the rocking thunder’s loud career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No shouts nor groans invade the Patriarch’s ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor valorous feats are seen nor flight nor fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one broad burst of darkness buries all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till chased by rising winds the smoke withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wide slaughter open’d on his view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the British leader borne afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dust and gore, beyond the wings of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while delirious panic seized his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their flags, their arms in wild confusion tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold in the midst a youthful warrior strode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tower’d undaunted o’er the field of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He checks the shameful rout, with vengeance burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pale Britons brighten where he turns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, when thick vapors veil the nightly sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The starry host in half-seen lustre fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till phosphor rises o’er the twinkling crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gives new splendor through his parting cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift on a fiery steed the stripling rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Form’d the light files to pierce the line of foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then waved his gleamy sword that flasht the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the Gallic legions hew’d his way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His troops press forward like a loose-broke flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep ranks away and smear their paths in blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hovering foes pursue the combat far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shower their balls along the flying war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the new leader turns his single force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Points the flight forward, speeds his backward course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The French recoiling half their victory yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the glad Britons quit the fatal field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These deathful deeds as great Columbus eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anxious tone he thus addrest the Guide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why combat here these transatlantic bands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strow their corses through thy pathless lands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can Europe’s realms, the seat of endless strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afford no trophies for the waste of life?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can monarchs there no proud applauses gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No living laurel for their people slain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Belgia’s plains, so fertile made with gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide heroes’ bones nor feast the vultures more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will Rhine no longer cleanse the crimson stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Danube bear their bodies to the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That infant empires here the shock must feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these pure streams with foreign carnage swell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who that chief? his name, his nation say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lifeblood seems his follies to repay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who the youth, that from the combat lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs up and saves the remnant of his host?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Power replied: Each age successive brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their varying views to earth’s contentious kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here roll the years when Albion’s parent hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aid of thy brave children, guards the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That growing states their veteran force may train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nobler prize in later fields to gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fields where Albion’s self shall turn their foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread broader sails and aim a deadlier blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recross in evil hour the astonisht wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her own brave sons to ravage and enslave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here she combats with the powers of Gaul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here her bold Braddock finds his destined fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Washington in that young martial frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From yon lost field begins a life of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis he, in future straits with loftier stride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The colon states to sovereign rule shall guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, prest by wrongs, their own full force they find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wield the sword for man, and bulwark humankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Seraph spoke; when through the purpled air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northern armies spread the flames of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift o’er the lake, to Crownpoint’s fortful strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rash Abercrombie leads his headlong band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fierce unequal fight; the batteries roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield the strong foes and rake the banner’d shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britannia’s sons again the contest yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again proud Gaul triumphant sweeps the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Amherst quick renews the raging toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drives wide hosting o’er Acadia’s isle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Wolfe beside him points the lifted lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boast of Britain and the scourge of France.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tide of victory here the heroes turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gallic navies in their harbors burn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High flame the ships, the billows swell with gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the red standard shades the conquer’d shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wolfe, now detacht and bent on bolder deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sail-borne host up sealike Lawrence leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stems the long lessening tide; till Abraham’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And famed Quebec rise frowning into sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift bounding on the bank, the foe they claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb the tall mountain, like a rolling flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Push wide their wings high bannering bright the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And move to fight as comets cope in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoke falls folding through the downward sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrouds the mountain from the patriarch’s eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While on the towering top, in glare of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flashing swords in fiery arches play.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on a side-seen storm, adistance driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames fork round the semivault of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick thunders roll, descending torrents flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dash down the clouds and whelm the hills below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as on plains of light when Michael strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swords of cherubim to combat move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten thousand fiery forms together fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flash new lightning on empyreal day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long raged promiscuous combat, half conceal’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sudden parle suspended all the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then roar the shouts, the smoke forsakes the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the huge hill is topt with heaps of slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch’d high in air Britannia’s standard waved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And good Columbus hail’d his country saved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While calm and silent, where the ranks retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw brave Wolfe in victory’s arms expire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the pale moon, when morning beams arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veils her lone visage in her midway skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She needs no longer drive the shades away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor waits to view the glories of the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the towns aspire; the cultured field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowded mart their copious treasures yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to his plow the colon soldier moves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And songs of triumph fill the warbling groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conscious flocks, returning joys that share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread through the grassland o’er the walks of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams freed of gore their crystal course regain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serener sunbeams gild the tentless plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A general jubilee o’er earth and heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads the gay morn and lights the lambent even.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rejoicing, confident of long repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Their friends triumphant, far retired their foes)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The British colonies now feel their sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Span the whole north and crowd the western day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acadia, Canada, earth’s total side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Slave’s long lake to Pensacola’s tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expand their soils for them; and here unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A range of highest hope, a promised age of gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But soon from eastern seas dark vapors rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep the vast Occident and shroud the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatch all the vision from the Hero’s sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrap the coast in sudden shades of night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turn’d, and sorrowful besought the Power:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why sinks the scene, or must I view no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must here the fame of that young world descend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall our brave children find so quick their end?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where then the promised grace? “Thou soon shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That half mankind shall owe their home to thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Saint replied: Ere long, beneath thy view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scene shall brighten and thy joys renew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here march the troublous years when goaded sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sons shall rise to change the ruling power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Albion’s prince, who sways the happy land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lawless rule extends his tyrant hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bind in slavery’s bands the peaceful host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their rights unguarded and their charters lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now raise thine eye; from this delusive claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What nations leap to life, what deeds adorn their fame!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus look’d; and still around them spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From south to north the immeasurable shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last the central darkness burst away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rising regions opened on the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more bright Delaware’s commercial stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Penn’s throng’d city cast a cheerful gleam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dome of state, as conscious of his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now seem’d to silver in a loftier sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfolding fair its gates; when lo, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembled states in solemn Congress shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sires elect from every province came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where wide Columbia bore the British name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Freedom’s sons their highborn lineage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homebred bravery still exalts the race:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sons who plant each various vast domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Chesapeake’s uncounted currents drain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race who Roanoke’s clear stream bestride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fell the pine on Appalachia’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Albemarle’s wide wave who trust their store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dike proud Pamlico’s unstable shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose groaning barks o’erload the long Santee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wind through the realms and labor to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Their cumbrous cargoes, to the sail consign’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek distant worlds, and feed and clothe mankind;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race whose rice-fields suck Savanna’s urn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose verdant vines Oconee’s bank adorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who freight the Delaware with golden grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tame their steeds on Monmouth’s flowery plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From huge Toconnok hills who drag their ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sledge their corn to Hudson’s quay-built shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who keel Connecticut’s long meadowy tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With patient plow his fallow plains divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread their white flocks o’er Narraganset’s vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or chase to each chill pole the monstrous whale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose venturous prows have borne their fame afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tamed all the seas and steer’d by every star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispensed to earth’s whole habitants their store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with their biting flukes have harrow’d every shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The virtuous delegates behold with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hostile Britons hovering o’er the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lament the strife that bids two worlds engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blot their annals with fraternal rage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two worlds in one broad state, whose bounds bestride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like heaven’s blue arch, the vast Atlantic tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By language, laws and liberty combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great nurse of thought, example to mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columbia rears her warning voice in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers to brothers call across the main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britannia’s patriots lend a listening ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But kings and courtiers push their mad career;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissension raves, the sheathless falchions glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth and ocean tremble at the war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus with stern brow, as worn by cares of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bosom big with dark unfolding fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High o’er his lance the sacred Eagle spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth’s whole crown still resting on his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rome’s hoary Genius rose and mournful stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On roaring Rubicon’s forbidden flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Cesar’s ensigns swept the Alpine air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led their long legions from the Gallic war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paused on the opposing bank with wings unfurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waved portentous o’er the shuddering world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god, with outstretcht arm and awful look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d the proud victor and prophetic spoke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrest, my son, thy parricidious hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass not the stream nor stab my filial state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stab not thyself, thy friends, thy total kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And worlds and ages in one state combined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief, regardless of the warning god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rein’d his rude steed and headlong past the flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried, farewell peace! took Fortune for his guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his country pour’d the slaughtering tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High on the foremost seat in living light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resplendent Randolph caught the world’s full sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He opes the cause, and points in prospect far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the toils that wait impending war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, reverend sage! thy race must soon be o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lend thy lustre and to shine no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the mild morning star from shades of even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads up the dawn and lights the front of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Points to the waking world the sun’s broad way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then veils his own and vaults above the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see bright Washington behind thee rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy following sun to gild our morning skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er shadowy climes to pour enlivening flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charms of freedom and the fire of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him the patriot bay beheld with pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero’s laurel springing by its side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword still sleeping rested on his thigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Britain still he cast a filial eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sovereign fortitude his visage bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her legions on the invaded shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sage Franklin next arose with cheerful mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiled unruffled o’er the solemn scene;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His locks of age a various wreath embraced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Palm of all arts that e’er a mortal graced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath him lay the sceptre kings had borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tame thunder<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> from the tempest torn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wythe, Mason, Pendleton with Henry join’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush, Rodney, Langdon, friends of humankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuasive Dickinson the former’s boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recording Thomson pride of all the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nash, Jay, the Livingstons, in council great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rutledge and Laurens held the rolls of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er wide creation turn’d their ardent eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the opprest to selfexistence rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All powers of state, in their extended plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring from consent, to shield the rights of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undaunted Wolcott urged the holy cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steady hand the solemn scene he draws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern thoughtful temperance with his ardor join’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor kings nor worlds could warp his steadfast mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With graceful ease but energetic tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eloquence that shook a thousand thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Majestic Hosmer stood; the expanding soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darts from his eyebeams while his accents roll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lo, the shaft of death untimely flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell’d the patriot from the Hero’s view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapt in the funeral shroud he sees descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guide of nations and the Muse’s friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columbus dropt a tear; while Hesper’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traced the freed spirit mounting through the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each generous Adams, freedom’s favorite pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hancock rose the tyrant’s rage to dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groupt with firm Jefferson, her steadiest hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of modest mien but vast unclouded scope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like four strong pillars of her state they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They clear from doubt her brave but wavering band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colonial charters in their hands they bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lawless acts of ministerial power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some injured right in every page appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A king in terrors and a land in tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all his guileful plots the veil they drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eye retortive lookt creation through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traced moral nature through her total plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Markt all the steps of liberty and man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowds rose to reason while their accents rung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <strong>Independence</strong> thunder’d from their tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Columbus turn’d; when rolling to the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swells o’er the seas an undulating roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow, dark, portentous, as the meteors sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And curtain black the illimitable deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High stalks from surge to surge a demon Form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That howls through heaven and breathes a billowing storm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head is hung with clouds; his giant hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flings a blue flame far flickering to the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His blood-stain’d limbs drip carnage as he strides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taint with gory grume the staggering tides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two red suns his quivering eyeballs glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engines of death behind him load the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pikes, muskets, mortars, guns and globes of fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lighted bombs that fusing trails expire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Percht on his helmet, two twin sisters rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The favorite offspring of the murderous god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famine and Pestilence; whom whilom bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wife, grim Discord, on Trinacria’s shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first their cyclop sons, from Etna’s forge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d his foul magazine, his gaping gorge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then earth convulsive groan’d, high shriekt the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hell in gratulation call’d him War.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Behind the fiend, swift hovering for the coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs o’er the wave Britannia’s sail-wing’d host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They crowd the main, they spread their sheets abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wide Lawrence to the Georgian flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Point their black batteries to the peopled shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spouting flames commence the hideous roar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where fortless Falmouth, looking o’er her bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror saw the approaching thunders play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire begins; the shells o’er arching fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoot a thousand rainbows through the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Charlestown spires, on Bedford roofs they light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groton and Fairfield kindle from the flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Norwalk expands the blaze; o’er Reading hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High flaming Danbury the welkin fills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Esopus burns, New York’s delightful fanes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sea-nursed Norfolk light the neighboring plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From realm to realm the smoky volumes bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach round the bays and up the streams extend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep o’er the concave heavy wreaths are roll’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And midland towns and distant groves infold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through solid curls of smoke the bursting fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climb in tall pyramids above the spires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concentring all the winds; whose forces, driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal rage from every point of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirl into conflict, round the scantling pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twisting flames and through the rafters roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suck up the cinders, send them sailing far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warn the nations of the raging war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend high the blazing vortex, swell’d and curl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careering, brightening o’er the lustred world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absorb the reddening clouds that round them run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lick the pale stars, and mock their absent sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seas catch the splendor, kindling skies resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falling structures shake the smoldering ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crowds of wild fugitives, with frantic tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit through the flames that pierce the midnight shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back on the burning domes revert their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where some lost friend, some perisht infant lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their maim’d, their sick, their age-enfeebled sires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have sunk sad victims to the sateless fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They greet with one last look their tottering walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the blaze thicken as the ruin falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then o’er the country train their dumb despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far behind them leave the dancing glare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their own crusht roofs still lend a trembling light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Point their long shadows and direct their flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till wandering wide they seek some cottage door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask the vile pittance due the vagrant poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or faint and faltering on the devious road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sink at last and yield their mortal load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But where the sheeted flames through Charlestown roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lashing waves hiss round the burning shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the deep folding fires dread Bunker’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thunders o’er all and shows a field of fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like nightly shadows through a flaming grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dark fray the closing squadrons move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They join, they break, they thicken through the glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blazing batteries burst along the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now wrapt in reddening smoke, now dim in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rake the hill, or wing the downward flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, wheel’d and wedged, Britannia’s veterans turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long lightnings from their muskets burn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There scattering strive the thin colonial train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose broken platoons still the field maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Britain’s fresh battalions rise the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with increasing volleys give the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, choked with dust, discolor’d deep in gore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gall’d on all sides from the ships and shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hesperia’s host moves off the field afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saves, by slow retreat, the sad remains of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There strides bold Putnam and from all the plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls the tired troops, the tardy rear sustains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, mid the whizzing balls that skim the lowe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves back his sword, defies the following foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this prime prelude of the toil that waits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nascent glories of his infant states,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columbus mourn’d the slain. A numerous crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half of each host, had bought their fame with blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the whole hill he saw the lifestream pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sloping pathways trod with tracks of gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, glorious Warren, thy cold earth was seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here spring thy laurels in immortal green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearest of chiefs that ever prest the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In freedom’s cause with early honors slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still dear in death, as when before our sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You graced the senate, or you led the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grateful Muse shall tell the world your fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unborn realms resound the deathless name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now from all plains, as settling smokes decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banded freemen rise in open day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall through the lessening shadows, half conceal’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They throng and gather in a central field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In unskill’d ranks but ardent soul they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claim quick the foe and eager strife demand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In front firm Washington superior shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye directed to the half-seen sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As through the cloud the bursting splendors glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light the passage to the distant foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His waving steel returns the living day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And points, through unfought fields, the warrior’s way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His valorous deeds to be confined no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monongahela, to thy desert shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matured with years, with nobler glory warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fate in his eye and empire on his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feels his sword the strength of nations wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moves before them with a broader shield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Greene rose beside him emulous in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His genius brightening as the danger warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In counsel great, in every science skill’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride of the camp and terror of the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eager look, conspicuous o’er the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And port majestic, brave Montgomery strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bared his tried blade, with honor’s call elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claim’d the first field and hasten’d to his fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln, with force unfolding as he rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scoped the whole war and measured well the foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm, cautious, firm, for frugal counsels known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frugal of other’s blood but liberal of his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heath for impending toil his falchion draws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearless Wooster aids the sacred cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mercer advanced an early death to prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinclair and Mifflin swift to combat move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here stood stern Putnam, scored with ancient scars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living records of his country’s wars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wayne like a moving tower assumes his post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fires the whole field and is himself a host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undaunted Stirling, prompt to meet his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gates and Sullivan for action rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Macdougal, Clinton, guardians of the state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch the nerved arm to pierce the depth of fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marion with rapture seized the sword of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Laurens graced a father’s patriot name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moultrie and Sumter lead their banded powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morgan in front of his bold riflers towers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His host of keen-eyed marksmen skill’d to pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their slugs unerring from the twisted bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sword, no bayonet they learn to wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gall the flank, they skirt the battling field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cull out the distant foe in full horse speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couch the long tube and eye the silver bead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn as he turns, dismiss the whizzing lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lodge the death-ball in his heedless head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So toil’d the huntsman Tell. His quivering dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prest by the bended bowstring, fears to part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreads the tremendous task, to graze but shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender temples of his infant son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the loved youth (the tyrant’s victim led)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears the poised apple tottering on his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sullen father, with reverted eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now marks the satrap, now the bright-hair’d boy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His second shaft impatient lies, athirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mend the expected error of the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pierce the monster, mid the insulted crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steep the pangs of nature in his blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep doubling tow’rd his breast, well poised and slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curve the strain’d horns of his indignant bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His left arm straightens as the dexter bends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his nerved knuckle with the gripe distends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft slides the reed back with the stiff drawn strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the steel point has reacht his steady hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to his keen fixt eye the shank he brings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twangs the loud cord, the feather’d arrow sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picks off the pippin from the smiling boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Uri’s rocks resound with shouts of joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon by an equal dart the tyrant bleeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cantons league, the work of fate proceeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Austria’s titled hordes with their own gore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat the fair fields they lorded long before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Gothard’s height while freedom first unfurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her infant banner o’er the modern world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bland, Moylan, Sheldon the long lines enforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With light-arm’d scouts, with solid squares of horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Knox from his full park to battle brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen tubes, <em>the last resort of kings</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long black rows in sullen silence wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their grim jaws gaping, soon to utter fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at his word the carbon clouds shall rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well aim’d thunders rock the shores and skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two foreign youths had caught the splendent flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fame’s hard school the warm disciples came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn sage Liberty’s unlesson’d lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To brave the tempest on her war-beat shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prometheus like to snatch a beam of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homeward bear the unscintillating ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour new life on Europe’s languid horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where millions crouch beneath one stupid lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Austria’s kaiser and the Russian czar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dungeons doom them and with fetters mar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fayette o’er Gaul’s vast realm some light shall spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Kosciusco rear Sarmatia’s head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Garonne’s bank to Duna’s wintry skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morn shall move and slumbering nations rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though their despots quake with wild alarms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lash and agonize the world to arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whelm for a while the untutor’d race in blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn against themselves the raging flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet shall the undying dawn with silent pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach over earth and every land embrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Europe’s well taught sons the boon shall share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bless the labors of the imprison’d Pair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Leda’s twins from Colchis raped the fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought the treasure to their native Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hail’d her heroes from their finisht wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assigned their place amid the cluster’d stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade round the eternal sky their trophies flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And charged the zodiac with their deathless fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Here move the strangers, here in freedom’s cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His untried blade each stripling hero draws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the great chief their eyes in transport roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And war and Washington renerve the soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Steuben advanced in veteran armor drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Prussian lore distinguisht o’er the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tactic lore; to this he bends his care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here transplants the discipline of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other brave chieftains of illustrious name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise into sight and equal honors claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who can tell the dew-drops of the morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or count the rays that in the diamond burn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Grieve not, my valiant friends; the faithful song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall soon redress the momentary wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your own bright swords have cleaved your course to fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all her hundred tongues recognize every claim.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the broad field as untaught warriors shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun’s glad beam their shining arms display’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High waved great Washington his glittering steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade the long train in circling order wheel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, while the banner’d youths around him prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With voice revered he thus the ranks addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye generous bands, behold the task to save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or yield whole nations to an instant grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See hosted myriads crowding to your shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear from all ports their vollied thunders roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Boston heights their bloody standards play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er long Champlain they lead their northern way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Virginian banks behold their streamers glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hostile navies load each southern tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath their steps your towns in ashes lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your inland empires feast their greedy eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon shall your fields to lordly parks be turn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your children butcher’d and your villas burn’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While following millions, through the reign of time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who claim their birth in this indulgent clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend the weak knee, to servile toils consigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sloth and slavery still degrade mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise then to war, to timely vengeance rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the gray sire, the helpless infant dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look through the world, see endless years descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What realms, what ages on your arms depend!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reverse the fate, avenge the insulted sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move to the work; we conquer or we die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spoke Columbia’s chief; his guiding hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Points out their march to every ardent band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assigns to each brave leader, as they claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His test of valor and his task of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his young host Montgomery first moves forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crush the vast invasion of the north;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er streams and lakes their flags far onward play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Navies and forts surrendering mark their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks, fens and deserts thwart the paths they go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hills before them lose their crags in snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud Lawrence, clogg’d with ice, indignant feels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sleet-clad oars, choked helms and crusted keels;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They buffet long his tides; when rise in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quebec’s dread walls, and Wolfe’s unclouded height.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Already there a few brave patriots stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn down with toil, by famine half subdued;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untrencht before the town they dare oppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fielded cohorts to the forted foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah gallant troop! deprived of half the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That deeds like yours in other times repays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since your prime chief (the favorite erst of fame)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath sunk so deep his hateful, hideous name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every honest Muse with horror flings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name unsounded from her sacred strings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else what high tones of rapture must have told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first great action<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> of a chief so bold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas his, ’twas yours, to brave unusual storms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tame rude nature in her drearest forms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foodless and guideless, through that waste of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You marcht long months; and, sore reduced by dearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reacht the proud capital, too feeble far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tempt unaided such a task of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now Montgomery’s host with hopes elate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joins your scant powers, to try the test of fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With skilful glance he views the fortress round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristled with pikes, with dark artillery crown’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resolves with naked steel to scale the towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snatch a realm from Britain’s hostile powers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now drear December’s boreal blasts arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A roaring hailstorm sweeps the shuddering skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night with condensing horror mantles all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trembling watch-lights glimmer from the wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bombs o’erarching, fusing, bursting high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glare scarce wanders through the loaded sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the louder shock of meteors drown’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The accustom’d ear in vain expects the sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He points the assault, and, through the howling air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er rocky ramparts leads audacious war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift rise the rapid files, the walls are red</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flashing flames that show the piles of dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till back recoiling from the ranks of slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They leave their leader with a feeble train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begirt with foes within the sounding wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thick beneath his single sabre fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But short the conflict; others hemm’d him round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brave Montgomery prest the gory ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second Wolfe Columbus here beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In youthful charms, a soul undaunted yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forlorn, o’erpower’d, his hardy host remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretcht by his side or led in captive chains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Macpherson, Cheesman share their general’s doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meigs, Morgan, Dearborn, planning deeds to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resign impatient prisoners; soon to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their happier falchions in a broader field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Triumphant to New York’s ill forted post</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Britannia turns her vast amphibious host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seas and storms, obedient to her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heave and discharge on every distant land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleets, floating batteries shake Manhattan’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hellgate rocks reverberate the roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift o’er the shuddering isles that line the bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red flags wave and battering engines play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howe leads aland the interminable train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his bold brother still bestorms the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Albion’s double pride, both famed afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each vext element, each world of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where British rapine follows peaceful toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murders nations, but to seize their spoil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wide sweep the veteran myriads o’er the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outnumbering thrice the raw colonial band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flatbush and Harlem sink beneath their fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Stirling yields and Sullivan retires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain sage Washington from hill to hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays round his foes with more than Fabian skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreats, advances, lures them to his snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To balance numbers by the shifts of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not their swords alone, but fell disease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thins his chill camp and chokes the sedgy seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baleful malady from Sirius sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floats in each breeze, impesting every tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the young soldier with the morning ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lays him lifeless ere the close of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from his father’s house, his mother’s care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the charities that nursed him there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dampt is the native rage that first impell’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insulted colons to the battling field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first their high-soul’d sentiment of right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full-vein’d vigor nerved their arm to fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For stript of health, benumb’d thy vital flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy muscles laxt and decomposed thy blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is thy courage, man? a foodless flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light unseen, a soul without a frame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each day the decimated ranks forgo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dying comrades to repulse the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each damp night along the slippery trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe at their post the suffocating stench;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sink by hundreds on the vapory soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a new fight relieves their deadlier toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last from fruitless combat, sore defeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Croton hills they lead a long retreat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale, curbed, exanimate, in dull despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Train the scant relics of the twofold war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword, the pestilence press hard behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body both assail, and one beats down the mind.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
