<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h1>Book VIII</h1>
			<div class="pg_body_wrapper">.</div>
			<h3>Argument.</h3>
			<p class="arg">Hymn to Peace. Eulogy on the heroes slain in the war; in which the Author finds occasion to mention his Brother. Address to the patriots who have survived the conflict; exhorting them to preserve liberty they have established. The danger of losing it by inattention illustrated in the rape of the Golden Fleece. Freedom succeeding to Despotism in the moral world, like Order succeeding to Chaos in the physical world. Atlas, the guardian Genius of Africa, denounces to Hesper the crimes of his people in the slavery of the Afripans. The Author addresses his countrymen on that subject, and on the principles of their government.</p>
			<p class="arg">Hesper, recurring to his object of showing Columbus the importance of his discoveries, reverses the order of time, and exhibits the continent again in its savage state. He then displays the progress of arts in America. Fur-trade. Fisheries. Productions. Commerce. Education. Philosophical discoveries. Painting. Poetry.</p>
			<p>Hail, holy Peace, from thy sublime abode<br/>
			Mid circling saints that grace the throne of God!<br/>
			Before his arm around our embryon earth<br/>
			Stretch’d the dim void, and gave to nature birth.<br/>
			Ere morning stars his glowing chambers hung,<br/>
			Or songs of gladness woke an angel’s tongue,<br/>
			Veil’d in the splendors of his beamful mind,<br/>
			In blest repose thy placid form reclined,<br/>
			Lived in his life, his inward sapience caught,<br/>
			And traced and toned his universe of thought.<br/>
			Borne thro the expanse with his creating voice<br/>
			Thy presence bade the unfolding worlds rejoice,<br/>
			Led forth the systems on their bright career,<br/>
			Shaped all their curves and fashion’d every sphere,<br/>
			Spaced out their suns, and round each radiant goal,<br/>
			Orb over orb, compell’d their train to roll,<br/>
			Bade heaven’s own harmony their force combine.<br/>
			Taught all their host symphonious strains to join,<br/>
			Gave to seraphic harps their sounding lays,<br/>
			Their joys to angels, and to men their praise.</p>
			<p>From scenes of blood, these verdant shores that stain,<br/>
			From numerous friends in recent battle slain,<br/>
			From blazing towns that scorch the purple sky,<br/>
			From houseless hordes their smoking walls that fly,<br/>
			From the black prison ships, those groaning graves,<br/>
			From warring fleets that vex the gory waves,<br/>
			From a storm’d world, long taught thy flight to mourn,<br/>
			I rise, delightful Peace, and greet thy glad return.</p>
			<p>For now the untuneful trump shall grate no more;<br/>
			Ye silver streams, no longer swell with gore,<br/>
			Bear from your war-beat banks the guilty stain<br/>
			With yon retiring navies to the main.<br/>
			While other views, unfolding on my eyes,<br/>
			And happier themes bid bolder numbers rise;<br/>
			Bring, bounteous Peace, in thy celestial throng.<br/>
			Life to my soul, and rapture to my song;<br/>
			Give me to trace, with pure unclouded ray,<br/>
			The arts and virtues that attend thy sway,<br/>
			To see thy blissful charms, that here descend,<br/>
			Thro distant realms and endless years extend.</p>
			<p>Too long the groans of death and battle’s bray<br/>
			Have rung discordant thro my turgid lay:<br/>
			The drum’s rude clang, the war wolfs hideous howl<br/>
			Convulsed my nerves and agonized my soul,<br/>
			Untuned the harp for all but misery’s pains,<br/>
			And chased the Muse from corse-encumber’d plains.<br/>
			Let memory’s balm its pious fragrance shed<br/>
			On heroes’ wounds and patriot warriors dead;<br/>
			Accept, departed Shades, these grateful sighs,<br/>
			Your fond attendants thro your homeward skies.</p>
			<p>And thou, my earliest friend, my Brother dear,<br/>
			Thy fall untimely still renews my tear.<br/>
			In youthful sports, in toils, in taste allied,<br/>
			My kind companion and my faithful guide,<br/>
			When death’s dread summons, from our infant eyes,<br/>
			Had call’d our last loved parent to the skies.<br/>
			Tho young in arms, and still obscure thy name,<br/>
			Thy bosom panted for the deeds of fame;<br/>
			Beneath Montgomery’s eye, when by thy steel<br/>
			In northern wilds the frequent savage fell.<br/>
			Fired by his voice, and foremost at his call,<br/>
			To mount the breach or scale the flamy wall,<br/>
			Thy daring hand had many a laurel gain’d,<br/>
			If years had ripen’d what thy fancy feign’d.<br/>
			Lamented Youth! when thy great leader bled,<br/>
			Thro the same wound thy parting spirit fled,<br/>
			Join’d the long train, the self-devoted band,<br/>
			The gods, the saviors of their native land.</p>
			<p>On fame’s high pinnacle their names shall shine,<br/>
			Unending ages greet the group divine,<br/>
			Whose holy hands our banners first unfurl’d,<br/>
			And conquer’d freedom for the grateful world.</p>
			<p>And you, their peers, whose steel avenged their blood,<br/>
			Whose breasts with theirs our sacred rampart stood,<br/>
			Illustrious relics of a thousand fields!<br/>
			To you at last the foe reluctant yields.<br/>
			But tho the Muse, too prodigal of praise,<br/>
			Dares with the dead your living worth to raise,<br/>
			Think not, my friends, the patriot’s task is done,<br/>
			Or Freedom safe, because the battle’s won.<br/>
			Unnumber’d foes, far different arms that wield,<br/>
			Wait the weak moment when she quits her shield,<br/>
			To plunge in her bold breast the insidious dart,<br/>
			Or pour keen poison round her thoughtless heart.<br/>
			Perhaps they’ll strive her votaries to divide,<br/>
			From their own veins to draw the vital tide;<br/>
			Perhaps, by cooler calculation shown,<br/>
			Create materials to construct a throne,<br/>
			Dazzle her guardians with the glare of state,<br/>
			Corrupt with power, with borrowed pomp inflate,<br/>
			Bid thro the land the soft infection creep,<br/>
			Whelm all her sons in one lethargic sleep,<br/>
			Crush her vast empire in its brilliant birth,<br/>
			And chase the goddess from the ravaged earth.</p>
			<p>The Dragon thus, that watch’d the Colchian fleece,<br/>
			Foil’d the fierce warriors of wide-plundering Greece;<br/>
			Warriors of matchless might and wondrous birth,<br/>
			Jove’s sceptred sons and demigods of earth.<br/>
			High on the sacred tree, the glittering prize<br/>
			Hangs o’er its guard, and tires the warriors’ eyes;<br/>
			First their hurl’d spears his spiral folds assail,<br/>
			Their spears fall pointless from his flaky mail;<br/>
			Onward with dauntless swords they plunge amain;<br/>
			He shuns their blows, recoils his twisting train,<br/>
			Darts forth his forky tongue, heaves high in air<br/>
			His fiery crest, and sheds a hideous glare,<br/>
			Champs, churns his poisonous juice, and hissing loud<br/>
			Spouts thick the stifling tempest o’er the crowd;<br/>
			Then, with one sweep of convoluted train,<br/>
			Rolls back all Greece, and besoms wide the plain,<br/>
			O’erturns the sons of gods, dispersing far<br/>
			The pirate horde, and closes quick the war.<br/>
			From his red jaws tremendous triumph roars,<br/>
			Dark Euxine trembles to its distant shores,<br/>
			Proud Jason starts, confounded in his might,<br/>
			Leads back his peers, and dares no more the fight.<br/>
			But the sly Priestess brings her opiate spell,<br/>
			Soft charms that hush the triple hound of hell,<br/>
			Bids Orpheus tune his all-enchanting lyre,<br/>
			And join to calm the guardian’s sleepless ire.<br/>
			Soon from the tepid ground blue vapors rise,<br/>
			And sounds melodious move along the skies;<br/>
			A settling tremor thro his folds extends,<br/>
			His crest contracts, his rainbow heck unbends,<br/>
			O’er all his hundred hoops the languor crawls,<br/>
			Each curve develops, every volute falls,<br/>
			His broad back flattens as he spreads the plain,<br/>
			And sleep consigns him to his lifeless reign.<br/>
			Flusht at the sight the pirates seize the spoil,<br/>
			And ravaged Colchis rues the insidious toil.</p>
			<p>Yes! fellow freemen, sons of high renown,<br/>
			Chant your loud peans, weave your civic crown;<br/>
			But know, the goddess you’ve so long adored,<br/>
			Tho now she scabbards your avenging sword,<br/>
			Calls you to vigil ance, to manlier cares,<br/>
			To prove in peace the men she proved in wars:<br/>
			Superior task! severer test of soul!<br/>
			’Tis here bold virtue plays her noblest role<br/>
			And merits most of praise. The warrior’s name,<br/>
			Tho peal’d and chimed on all the tongues of fame,<br/>
			Sounds less harmonious to the grateful mind<br/>
			Than his who fashions and improves mankind.</p>
			<p>And what high meed your new vocation waits!<br/>
			Freedom, parturient with a hundred states,<br/>
			Confides them to your hand; the nascent prize<br/>
			Claims all your care, your soundest wisdom tries.<br/>
			Ah nurture, temper, train your infant charge,<br/>
			Its force develop and its life enlarge,<br/>
			Unfold each day some adolescent grace,<br/>
			Some right recognise or some duty trace;<br/>
			Mould a fair model for the realms of earth,<br/>
			Call moral nature to a second birth,<br/>
			Reach, renovate the world’s great social plan,<br/>
			And here commence the sober sense of man,</p>
			<p>For lo, in other climes and elder states,<br/>
			What strange inversion all his works awaits!<br/>
			From age to age, on every peopled shore,<br/>
			Stalks the fell Demon of despotic power,<br/>
			Sweeps in his march the mounds of art away.<br/>
			Blots with his breath the trembling disk of day,<br/>
			Treads down whole nations every stride he takes,<br/>
			And wraps their labors in his fiery flakes.</p>
			<p>As Anarch erst around his regions hurl’d<br/>
			The wrecks, long crush’d, of time’s anterior world;<br/>
			While nature mourn’d, in wild confusion tost,<br/>
			Her suns extinguisht and her systems lost;<br/>
			Light, life and instinct shared the dreary trance,<br/>
			And gravitation fled the field of chance;<br/>
			No laws remain’d of matter, motion, space;<br/>
			Time lost his count, the universe his place;<br/>
			Till Order came, in her cerulean robes,<br/>
			And launch’d and rein’d the renovated globes,<br/>
			Stock’d with harmonious worlds the vast Inane,<br/>
			Archt her new heaven and fixt her boundless reign:<br/>
			So kings convulse the moral frame, the base<br/>
			Of all the codes that can accord the race;<br/>
			And so from their broad grasp, their deadly ban,<br/>
			’Tis yours to snatch this earth, to raise regenerateman.</p>
			<p>My friends, I love your fame, I joy to raise<br/>
			The high-toned anthem of my country’s praise;<br/>
			To sing her victories, virtues, wisdom, weal,<br/>
			Boast with loud voice the patriot pride I feel;<br/>
			Warm wild I sing; and, to her failings blind,<br/>
			Mislead myself, perhaps mislead mankind.<br/>
			Land that I love! is this the whole we owe?<br/>
			Thy pride to pamper, thy fair face to show;<br/>
			Dwells there no blemish where such glories shine?<br/>
			And lurks no spot in that bright sun of thine?<br/>
			Hark! a dread voice, with heaven-astounding strain,<br/>
			Swells Wee a thousand thunders o’er the main,<br/>
			Rolls and reverberates around thy hills,<br/>
			And Hesper’s heart with pangs paternal fills.<br/>
			Thou hearst him not; ’tis Atlas, throned sublime.<br/>
			Great brother guardian of old Afric’s clime;<br/>
			High o’er his coast he rears his frowning form,<br/>
			Overlooks and calms his sky-borne fields of storm,<br/>
			Flings off the clouds that round his shoulders hung,<br/>
			And breaks from clogs of ice his trembling tongue;<br/>
			While far thro space with rage and grief he glares,<br/>
			Heaves his hoar head and shakes the heaven he bears:<br/>
			—Son of my sire! O latest brightest birth<br/>
			That sprang from his fair spouse, prolific earth!<br/>
			Great Hesper, say what sordid ceaseless hate<br/>
			Impels thee thus to mar my elder state.<br/>
			Our sire assign’d thee thy more glorious reign,<br/>
			Secured and bounded by our laboring main;<br/>
			That main (tho still my birthright name it bear)<br/>
			Thy sails o’ershadow, thy brave children share;<br/>
			I grant it thus; while air surrounds the ball,<br/>
			Let breezes blow, let oceans roll for all.<br/>
			But thy proud sons, a strange ungenerous race,<br/>
			Enslave my tribes, and each fair world disgrace,<br/>
			Provoke wide vengeance on their lawless land,<br/>
			The bolt ill placed in thy forbearing hand.⁠—<br/>
			Enslave my tribes! then boast their cantons free,<br/>
			Preach faith and justice, bend the sainted knee,<br/>
			Invite all men their liberty to share,<br/>
			Seek public peace, defy the assaults of war,<br/>
			Plant, reap, consume, enjoy their fearless toil,<br/>
			Tame their wild floods, to fatten still their soil,<br/>
			Enrich all nations with their nurturing store,<br/>
			And rake with venturous fluke each wondering shore.⁠—</p>
			<p>Enslave my tribes! what, half mankind imban,<br/>
			Then read, expound, enforce the rights of man!<br/>
			Prove plain and clear how nature’s hand of old<br/>
			Cast all men equal in her human mould!<br/>
			Their fibres, feelings, reasoning powers the same,<br/>
			Like wants await them, like desires inflame.<br/>
			Thro former times with learned book they tread,<br/>
			Revise past ages and rejudge the dead,<br/>
			Write, speak, avenge, for ancient sufferings feel,<br/>
			Impale each tyrant on their pens of steel,<br/>
			Declare how freemen can a world create,<br/>
			And slaves and masters ruin every state.⁠—<br/>
			Enslave my tribes! and think, with dumb disdain,<br/>
			To scape this arm and prove my vengeance vain!<br/>
			But look! methinks beneath my foot I ken<br/>
			A few chain’d things that seem no longer men;<br/>
			Thy sons perchance! whom Barbary’s coast can tell<br/>
			The sweets of that loved scourge they wield so well.<br/>
			Link’d in a line, beneath the driver’s goad,<br/>
			See how they stagger with their lifted load;<br/>
			The shoulder’d rock, just wrencht from off my hill<br/>
			And wet with drops their straining orbs distil,<br/>
			Galls, grinds them sore, along the rarnpart led,<br/>
			And the chain clanking counts the steps they tread.</p>
			<p>By night close bolted in the bagnio’s gloom,<br/>
			Think how they ponder on their dreadful doom,<br/>
			Recal the tender sire, the weeping bride,<br/>
			The home, far sunder’d by a waste of tide,<br/>
			Brood all the ties that once endear’d them there,<br/>
			But now, strung stronger, edge their keen despair.<br/>
			Till here a fouler fiend arrests their pace:<br/>
			Plague, with his burning breath and bloated face,<br/>
			With saffron eyes that thro the dungeon shine,<br/>
			And the black tumors bursting from the groin,<br/>
			Stalks o’er the slave; who, cowering on the sod,<br/>
			Shrinks from the Demon and invokes his God,<br/>
			Sucks hot contagion with his quivering breath,<br/>
			And, rack’d with rending torture, sinks in death.</p>
			<p>Nor shall these pangs atone the nation’s crime;<br/>
			Far heavier vengeance, in the march of time,<br/>
			Attends them still; if still they dare debase<br/>
			And hold inthrall’d the millions of my race;<br/>
			A vengeance that shall shake the world’s deep frame,<br/>
			That heaven abhors, and hell might shrink to name.<br/>
			Nature, long outraged, delves the crusted sphere,<br/>
			And moulds the mining mischief dark and drear;<br/>
			Europa too the penal shock shall find,<br/>
			The rude soul-selling monsters of mankind:</p>
			<p>Where Alps and Andes at their bases meet,<br/>
			In earth’s mid caves to lock their granite feet,<br/>
			Heave their broad spines, expand each breathing lobe,<br/>
			And with their massy members rib the globe,<br/>
			Her cauldron’d floods of fire their blast prepare;<br/>
			Her wallowing womb of subterranean war<br/>
			Waits but the fissure that my wave shall find,<br/>
			To force the foldings of the rocky rind,<br/>
			Crash your curst continent, and whirl on high<br/>
			The vast avulsion vaulting thro the sky,<br/>
			Fling far the bursting fragments, scattering wide<br/>
			Rocks, mountains, nations o’er the swallowing tide.<br/>
			Plunging and surging with alternate sweep,<br/>
			They storm the day-vault and lay bare the deep,<br/>
			Toss, tumble, plough their place, then slow subside,<br/>
			And swell each ocean as their bulk they hide;<br/>
			Two oceans dasht in one! that climbs and roars,<br/>
			And seeks in vain the exterminated shores,<br/>
			The deep drencht hemisphere. Far sunk from day,<br/>
			It crumbles, rolls, it churns the settling sea,<br/>
			Turns up each prominence, heaves every side,<br/>
			To pierce once more the landless length of tide;<br/>
			Till some poized Pambamarca looms at last<br/>
			A dim lone island in the watery waste,<br/>
			Mourns all his minor mountains wreck’d and hurl’d,<br/>
			Stands the sad relic of a ruin’d world,<br/>
			Attests the wrath our mother kept in store,<br/>
			And rues her judgments on the race she bore.<br/>
			No saving Ark around him rides the main,<br/>
			Nor Dove weak-wing’d her footing finds again;<br/>
			His own bald Eagle skims alone the sky,<br/>
			Darts from all points of heaven her searching eye,<br/>
			Kens, thro the gloom, her ancient rock of rest,<br/>
			And finds her cavern’d crag, her solitary nest.</p>
			<p>Thus toned the Titan his tremendous knell,<br/>
			And lash’d his ocean to a loftier swell;<br/>
			Earth groans responsive, and with laboring woes<br/>
			Leans o’er the surge and stills the storm he throws.</p>
			<p>Fathers and friends, I know the boding fears<br/>
			Of angry genii and of rending spheres<br/>
			Assail not souls like yours; whom Science bright<br/>
			Thro shadowy nature leads with surer light;<br/>
			For whom she strips the heavens of love and hate,<br/>
			Strikes from Jove’s hand the brandisht bolt of fate,<br/>
			Gives each effect its own indubious cause,<br/>
			Divides her moral from her physic laws,<br/>
			Shows where the virtues find their nurturing food,<br/>
			And men their motives to be just and good.</p>
			<p>You scorn the Titan’s threat; nor shall I strain<br/>
			The powers of pathos in a task so vain<br/>
			As Afric’s wrongs to sing; for what avails<br/>
			To harp for you these known familiar tales?<br/>
			To tongue mute misery, and re-rack the soul<br/>
			With crimes oft copied from that bloody scroll<br/>
			Where Slavery pens her woes; tho ’tis but there<br/>
			We learn the weight that mortal life can be.<br/>
			The tale might startle still the accustom’d ear,<br/>
			Still shake the nerve that pumps the pearly tear,<br/>
			Melt every heart, and thro the nation gain<br/>
			Full many a voice to break the barbarous chain.<br/>
			But why to sympathy for guidance fly,<br/>
			(Her aids uncertain and of scant supply)<br/>
			When your own self-excited sense affords<br/>
			A guide more sure, and every sense accords?<br/>
			Where strong self-interest, join’d with duty, lies,<br/>
			Where doing right demands no sacrifice,<br/>
			Where profit, pleasure, life-expanding fame<br/>
			League their allurements to support the claim,<br/>
			’Tis safest there the impleaded cause to trust;<br/>
			Men well instructed will be always just.</p>
			<p>From slavery then your rising realms to save,<br/>
			Regard the master, notice not the slave;<br/>
			Consult alone for freemen, and bestow<br/>
			Your best, your only cares, to keep them so.<br/>
			Tyrants are never free; and, small and great,<br/>
			All masters must be tyrants soon or late;<br/>
			So nature works; and oft the lordling knave<br/>
			Turns out at once a tyrant and a slave,<br/>
			Struts, cringes, bullies, begs, as courtiers must,<br/>
			Makes one a god, another treads in dust,<br/>
			Fears all alike, and filches whom he can,<br/>
			But knows no equal, finds no friend in man.</p>
			<p>Ah! would you not be slaves, with lords and kings,<br/>
			Then be not masters; there the danger springs.<br/>
			The whole crude system that torments this earth,<br/>
			Of rank, privation, privilege of birth,<br/>
			False honor, fraud, corruption, civil jars,<br/>
			The rage of conquest and the curse of wars,<br/>
			Pandora’s total shower, all ills combined<br/>
			That erst o’erwhelm’d and still distress mankind,<br/>
			Box’d up secure in your deliberate hand,<br/>
			Wait your behest, to fix or fly this land.</p>
			<p>Equality of Right is nature’s plan;<br/>
			And following nature is the march of man.<br/>
			Whene’er he deviates in the least degree,<br/>
			When, free himself, he would be more than free,<br/>
			The baseless column, rear’d to bear his bust,<br/>
			Falls as he mounts, and whelms him in the dust.</p>
			<p>See Rome’s rude sires, with autocratic gait,<br/>
			Tread down their tyrant and erect their state;<br/>
			Their state secured, they deem it wise and brave<br/>
			That every freeman should command a slave,<br/>
			And, flusht with franchise of his camp and town,<br/>
			Rove thro the world and hunt the nations down;<br/>
			Master and man the same vile spirit gains,<br/>
			Rome chains the world, and wears herself the chains.</p>
			<p>Mark modern Europe with her feudal codes,<br/>
			Serfs, villains, vassals, nobles, kings and gods,<br/>
			All slaves of different grades, corrupt and curst<br/>
			With high and low, for senseless rank athirst,<br/>
			Wage endless wars; not fighting to be free,<br/>
			But <i>cujum pecus</i>, whose base herd they’ll be.</p>
			<p>Too much of Europe, here transplanted o’er,<br/>
			Nursed feudal feelings on your tented shore,<br/>
			Brought sable serfs from Afric, call’d it gain,<br/>
			And urged your sires to forge the fatal chain.<br/>
			But now, the tents o’erturn’d, the war dogs fled,<br/>
			Now fearless Freedom rears at last her head<br/>
			Matcht with celestial Peace⁠—my friends, beware<br/>
			To shade the splendors of so bright a pair;<br/>
			Complete their triumph, fix their firm abode,<br/>
			Purge all privations from your liberal code,<br/>
			Restore their souls to men, give earth repose,<br/>
			And save your sons from slavery, wars and woes.</p>
			<p>Based on its rock of Right your empire lies,<br/>
			On walls of wisdom let the fabric rise;<br/>
			Preserve your principles, their force unfold,<br/>
			Let nations prove them and let kings behold.<br/>
			<strong>Equality</strong>, your first firm-grounded stand;<br/>
			Then <strong>free election</strong>; then your <strong>federal band</strong>;<br/>
			This holy Triad should forever shine<br/>
			The great compendium of all rights divine,<br/>
			Creed of all schools, whence youths by millions draw<br/>
			Their themes of right, their decalogues of law;<br/>
			Till men shall wonder (in these codes inured)<br/>
			How wars were made, how tyrants were endured.</p>
			<p>Then shall your works of art superior rise,<br/>
			Your fruits perfume a larger length of skies,<br/>
			Canals careering climb your sunbright hills,<br/>
			Vein the green slopes and strow their nurturing rills,<br/>
			Thro tunnel’d heights and sundering ridges glide,<br/>
			Rob the rich west of half Kenhawa’s tide,<br/>
			Mix your wide climates, all their stores confound,<br/>
			And plant new ports in every midland mound.<br/>
			Your lawless Missisippi, now who slimes<br/>
			And drowns and desolates his waste of climes,<br/>
			Ribb’d with your dikes, his torrent shall restrain,<br/>
			And ask your leave to travel to the main;<br/>
			Won from his wave while rising cantons smile,<br/>
			Rear their glad nations and reward their toil.</p>
			<p>Thus Nile’s proud flood to human hands of yore<br/>
			Raised and resign’d his tide-created shore,<br/>
			Call’d from his Ethiop hills their hardy swains,<br/>
			And waved their harvests o’er his newborn plains;<br/>
			Earth’s richest realm from his tamed current sprung;<br/>
			There nascent science toned her infant tongue,<br/>
			Taught the young arts their tender force to try,<br/>
			To state the seasons and unfold the sky;<br/>
			Till o’er the world extended and refined,<br/>
			They rule the destinies of humankind.</p>
			<p>Now had Columbus well enjoy’d the sight<br/>
			Of armies vanquisht and of fleets in flight,<br/>
			From all Hesperia’s heaven the darkness flown,<br/>
			And colon crowds to sovereign sages grown.<br/>
			To cast new glories o’er the changing clime,<br/>
			The guardian Power reversed the flight of time,<br/>
			Roll’d back the years that led their course before,<br/>
			Stretch’d out immense the wild uncultured shore;<br/>
			Then shifts the total scene, and rears to view<br/>
			Arts and the men that useful arts pursue.<br/>
			As o’er the canvass when the painter’s mind<br/>
			Glows with a future landscape well design’d,<br/>
			While Panorama’s wondrous aid he calls,<br/>
			To crowd whole realms within his circling walls,<br/>
			Lakes, fields and forests, ports and navies rise,<br/>
			A new creation to his kindling eyes;<br/>
			He smiles o’er all; sand in delightful strife<br/>
			The pencil moves and Calls the whole to life.<br/>
			So while Columbia’s patriarch stood sublime,<br/>
			And saw rude nature clothe the trackless clime;<br/>
			The green banks heave, the winding currents pour,<br/>
			The bays and harbors cleave the yielding shore,<br/>
			The champaigns spread, the solemn groves arise,<br/>
			And the rough mountains lengthen round the skies;<br/>
			Thro all their bounds he traced, with skilful ken,<br/>
			The unform’d seats and future walks of men;<br/>
			Mark’d where the field should bloom, the pennon play,<br/>
			Great cities grow and empires claim their sway;<br/>
			When, sudden waked by Hesper’s waving hand,<br/>
			They rose obedient round the cultured land.</p>
			<p>In western tracts, where still the wildmen tread,<br/>
			From sea to sea an inland commerce spread;<br/>
			On the dim streams and thro the gloomy grove<br/>
			The trading bauds their cumbrous burdens move;<br/>
			Furs, peltry, drugs, and all the native store<br/>
			Of midland realms descended to the shore.</p>
			<p>Where summer suns, along the northern coast,<br/>
			With feeble force dissolve the chains of frost,<br/>
			Prolific waves the scaly nations trace,<br/>
			And tempt the toils of man’s laborious race.<br/>
			Tho rich Brazilian strands, beneath the tide,<br/>
			Their shells of pearl and sparkling pebbles hide,<br/>
			While for the gaudy prize a venturous train<br/>
			Plunge the dark deep and brave the surging main,<br/>
			Drag forth the shining gewgaws into air,<br/>
			To stud a sceptre or emblaze a star;<br/>
			Far wealthier stores these genial tides display,<br/>
			And works less dangerous with their spoils repay.<br/>
			The Hero saw the hardy crews advance,<br/>
			Cast the long line and aim the barbed lance;<br/>
			Load the deep floating barks, and bear abroad<br/>
			To every land the life-sustaining food;<br/>
			Renascent swarms by nature’s care supplied,<br/>
			Repeople still the shoals and fin the fruitful tide.</p>
			<p>Where southern streams thro broad savannas bend,<br/>
			The rice-clad vales their verdant rounds extend;<br/>
			Tobago’s plant its leaf expanding yields,<br/>
			The maize luxuriant clothes a thousand fields;<br/>
			Steeds, herds and flocks o’er northern regions rove,<br/>
			Embrown the hill and wanton thro the grove.<br/>
			The woodlands wide their sturdy honors bend,<br/>
			The pines, the liveoaks to the shores descend,<br/>
			There couch the keels, the crooked ribs arise,<br/>
			Hulls heave aloft and mastheads mount the skies;<br/>
			Launcht on the deep o’er every wave they<br/>
			Feed tropic isles and Europe’s looms supply.</p>
			<p>To nurse the arts and fashion freedom’s lore<br/>
			Young schools of science rise along the shore;<br/>
			Great without pomp their modest walls expand,<br/>
			Harvard and Yale and Princeton grace the land,<br/>
			Penn’s student halls his youths with gladness greet,<br/>
			On James’s bank Virginian Muses meet,<br/>
			Manhattan’s mart collegiate domes command,<br/>
			Bosom’d in groves, see growing Dartmouth stand;<br/>
			Bright o’er its realm reflecting solar fires,<br/>
			On yon tall hill Rhode Island’s seat aspires.</p>
			<p>Thousands of humbler name around them rise,<br/>
			Where homebred freemen seize the solid prize;<br/>
			Fixt in small spheres, with safer beams to shine,<br/>
			They reach the useful and refuse the fine,<br/>
			Found, on its proper base, the social plan,<br/>
			The broad plain truths, the common sense of man,<br/>
			His obvious wants, his mutual aids discern,<br/>
			His rights familiarize, his duties learn,<br/>
			Feel moral fitness all its force dilate,<br/>
			Embrace the village and comprise the state.<br/>
			Each rustic here who turns the furrow’d soil,<br/>
			The maid, the youth that ply mechanic toil,<br/>
			In equal rights, in useful arts inured,<br/>
			Know their just claims, and see their claims secured;<br/>
			They watch their delegates, each law revise,<br/>
			Its faults designate and its merits prize,<br/>
			Obey, but scrutinize; and let the test<br/>
			Of sage experience prove and fix the best.</p>
			<p>Here, fired by virtue’s animating flame,<br/>
			The preacher’s task persuasive sages claim,<br/>
			To mould religion to the moral mind,<br/>
			In bands of peace to harmonize mankind,<br/>
			To life, to light, to promised joys above<br/>
			The soften’d soul with ardent hope to move.<br/>
			No dark intolerance blinds the zealous throng,<br/>
			No arm of power attendant on their tongue;<br/>
			Vext Inquisition, with her flaming brand,<br/>
			Shuns their mild march, nor dares approach the land.<br/>
			Tho different creeds their priestly robes denote,<br/>
			Their orders various and their rites remote,<br/>
			Yet one their voice, their labors all combined,<br/>
			Lights of the world and friends of humankind.<br/>
			So the bright galaxy o’er heaven displays<br/>
			Of various stars the same unbounded blaze;<br/>
			Where great and small their mingling rays unite,<br/>
			And earth and skies exchange the friendly light.</p>
			<p>And lo, my son that other sapient band,<br/>
			The torch of science flamiflg in their hand!<br/>
			Thro nature’s range their searching souls aspire,<br/>
			Or wake to life the canvass and the lyre.<br/>
			Fixt in sublimest thought, behold them rise<br/>
			World after world unfolding to their eyes,<br/>
			Lead, light, allure them thro the total plan,<br/>
			And give new guidance to the paths of man.</p>
			<p>Yon meteor-mantled hill see Franklin tread,<br/>
			Heaven’s awful thunders tolling o’er his head,<br/>
			Convolving clouds the billowy skies deform,<br/>
			And forky flames emblaze the blackening storm,<br/>
			See the descending streams around him burn,<br/>
			Glance on his rod and with his finger turn;<br/>
			He bids conflicting fulminants expire<br/>
			The guided blast, and holds the imprison’d fire.<br/>
			No more, when doubling storms the vault o’erspread,<br/>
			The livid glare shall strike thy race with dread,<br/>
			Nor towers nor temples, shuddering with the sound,<br/>
			Sink in the flames and shake the sheeted ground.<br/>
			His well tried wires, that every tempest wait,<br/>
			Shall teach mankind to ward the bolts of fate,<br/>
			With pointed steel o’ertop the trembling spire,<br/>
			And lead from untouch’d walls the harmless flre;<br/>
			Fill’d with his fame while distant climes rejoice,<br/>
			Wherever lightning shines or thunder rears its voice.</p>
			<p>And see sage Rittenhouse, with ardent eye,<br/>
			Lift the long tube and pierce the starry sky;<br/>
			Clear in his view the circling planets roll,<br/>
			And suns and satellites their course control.<br/>
			He marks what laws the widest wanderers bind,<br/>
			Copies creation in his forming mind,<br/>
			Sees in his hall the total semblance rise,<br/>
			And mimics there the labors of the skies.<br/>
			There student youths without their tubes behold<br/>
			The spangled heavens their mystic maze unfold,<br/>
			And crowded schools their cheerful chambers grace<br/>
			With all the spheres that cleave the vast of space.</p>
			<p>To guide the sailor in his wandering way,<br/>
			See Godfrey’s glass<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> reverse the beams of day.<br/>
			His lifted quadrant to the eye displays<br/>
			From adverse skies the counteracting rays;<br/>
			And marks, as devious sails bewilder’d roll,<br/>
			Each nice gradation from the steadfast pole.</p>
			<p>West<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> with his own great soul the canvass warms,<br/>
			Creates, inspires, impassions human forms,<br/>
			Spurns critic rules, and seizing safe the heart,<br/>
			Breaks down the former frightful bounds of Art;<br/>
			Where ancient manners, with exclusive reign,<br/>
			From half mankind withheld her fair domain.<br/>
			He calls to life each patriot, chief or sage,<br/>
			Garb’d in the dress and drapery of his age.<br/>
			Again bold Regulus to death returns,<br/>
			Again her falling Wolfe Britannia mourns;<br/>
			Lahogue, Boyne, Cressy, Nevilcross demand<br/>
			And gain fresh lustre from his copious hand;<br/>
			His Lear stalks wild with woes, the gods defies,<br/>
			Insults the tempest and outstorms the skies;<br/>
			Edward in arms to frowning combat moves,<br/>
			Or, won to pity by the queen he loves,<br/>
			Spares the devoted Six, whose deathless deed<br/>
			Preserves the town his vengeance doom’d to bleed.</p>
			<p>With rival force, see Copley’s pencil trace<br/>
			The air of action and the charms of face.<br/>
			Fair in his tints unfold the scenes of state,<br/>
			The senate listens and the peers debate;<br/>
			Pale consternation every heart appals,<br/>
			In act to speak, when death-struck Chatham fails.<br/>
			He bids dread Calpe cease to shake the waves,<br/>
			While Elliott’s arm the host of Bourbon saves;<br/>
			O’er sail-wing’d batteries sinking in the flood,<br/>
			Mid flames and darkness, drench’d in hostile blood,<br/>
			Britannia’s sons extend their generous hand<br/>
			To rescue foes from death, and bear them to the land.</p>
			<p>Fired with the martial deeds that bathed in gore<br/>
			His brave companions on his native shore,<br/>
			Trumbull with daring hand their fame recals;<br/>
			He shades with night Quebec’s beleagured walls,<br/>
			Thro flashing flames, that midnight war supplies,<br/>
			The assailants yield, their great Montgomery dies.<br/>
			On Bunker height, thro floods of hostile fire,<br/>
			His Putnam toils till all the troops retire,<br/>
			His Warren, pierced with balls, at last lies low,<br/>
			And leaves a victory to the wasted foe.<br/>
			Britannia too his glowing tint shall claim,<br/>
			To pour new splendor on her Calpean fame;<br/>
			He leads her bold sortie, and from their towers<br/>
			O’erturns the Gallic and Iberian powers.</p>
			<p>See rural seats of innocence and ease,<br/>
			High tufted towers and walks of waving trees,<br/>
			The white wates dashing on the Craggy shores,<br/>
			Meandring streams and meads of mingled flowers,<br/>
			Where nature’s sons their wild excursions tread,<br/>
			In just design from Taylor’s pencil spread.</p>
			<p>Stuart and Brown the moving portrait raise,<br/>
			Each rival stroke the force of life conveys;<br/>
			Heroes and beauties round their tablets stand,<br/>
			And rise unfading from their plastic hand;<br/>
			Each breathing form preserves its wonted grace,<br/>
			And all the Soul stands speaking in the face.</p>
			<p>Two kindred arts the swelling statue heave,<br/>
			Wake the dead wax, and teach the stone to live.<br/>
			While the bold chissel claims the rugged strife,<br/>
			To rouse the sceptred marble into life,</p>
			<p>See Wright’s fair hands the livelier fire control,<br/>
			In waxen forms she breathes impassion’d soul;<br/>
			The pencil’d tint o’er moulded substance glows,<br/>
			And different powers the peerless art compose.<br/>
			Grief, rage and fear beneath her fingers start,<br/>
			Roll the wild eye and pour the bursting heart;<br/>
			The world’s dead fathers wait her wakening call;<br/>
			And distant ages fill the storied hall.</p>
			<p>To equal fame ascends thy tuneful throng,<br/>
			The boast of genius and the pride of song;<br/>
			Caught from the cast of every age and clime,<br/>
			Their lays shall triumph o’er the lapse of time.</p>
			<p>With lynx-eyed glance thro nature far to pierce,<br/>
			With all the powers and every charm of verse,<br/>
			Each science opening in his ample mind,<br/>
			His fancy glowing and his taste refined,<br/>
			See Trumbull lead the train. His skilful hand<br/>
			Hurls the keen darts of satire round the land.<br/>
			Pride, knavery, dullness feel his mortal stings,<br/>
			And listening virtue triumphs while he sings;<br/>
			Britain’s foil’d sons, victorious now no more,<br/>
			In guilt retiring from the wasted shore,<br/>
			Strive their curst cruelties to hide in vain;<br/>
			The world resounds them in his deathless strain.</p>
			<p>On wings of faith to elevate the soul<br/>
			Beyond the bourn of earth’s benighted pole,<br/>
			For Dwight’s high harp the epic Muse sublime<br/>
			Hails her new empire in the western clime.<br/>
			Tuned from the tones by seers seraphic sung,<br/>
			Heaven in his eye and rapture on his tongue,<br/>
			His voice revives old Canaan’s promised land,<br/>
			The long-fought fields of Jacob’s chosen band.<br/>
			In Hanniel’s fate, proud faction finds its doom,<br/>
			Ai’s midnight flames light nations to their tomb,<br/>
			In visions bright supernal joys are given,<br/>
			And all the dark futurities of heaven.</p>
			<p>While freedom’s cause his patriot bosom warms,<br/>
			In counsel sage, nor inexpert in arms,<br/>
			See Humphreys glorious from the field retire,<br/>
			Sheathe the glad sword and string the soothing lyre;<br/>
			That lyre which erst, in hours of dark despair,<br/>
			Roused the sad realms to finish well the war.<br/>
			O’er fallen friends, with all the strength of woe,<br/>
			Fraternal sighs in his strong numbers flow;<br/>
			His country’s wrongs, her duties, dangers, praise,<br/>
			Fire his full soul and animate his lays:<br/>
			Wisdom and War with equal joy shall own<br/>
			So fond a votary and so brave a son.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
